Title: Dynamic and task-dependent decoding of the human attentional spotlight from MEG

URL Source: https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2025.10.23.684150v2.full.pdf

Number of Pages: 36

Markdown Content:
1

# Dynamic and task -dependent decoding of the human attentional 

# spotlight from MEG 

Maryam Mostafalu 1,2 , Tommy Clausner §,2 , Maxime Ferez §,2 , Danila Shelepenkov §,2 , Sébastien Daligault 2,

Denis Schwartz 2, Jérémie Mattout 2, Suliann Ben Hamed* ,1 , Mathilde Bonnefond* ,2 

1. Institut des Sciences Cognitives Marc Jeannerod, CNRS UMR 5229, Université Claude Bernard Lyon 

I, Bron, France 

2. Université Claude Bernard Lyon 1, CNRS, INSERM, INRIA, Centre de Recherche en Neurosciences de 

Lyon CRNL U1028, UMR5292, COPHY, F -69500, Bron, France 

§ and *: these authors e qually contributed to the work 

## Corresponding author s:

Maryam Mostafalu ( maryam.mostafalu@isc.cnrs.fr ); Mathilde Bonnefond 

(mathilde.bonnefond@inserm.fr ); Suliann Ben Hamed ( benhamed@isc.cnrs.fr )

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 24, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.23.684150 doi: bioRxiv preprint

2

## Abstract 

Attention is a fundamental mechanism enabling the brain to overcome its limited capac ity for parallel 

processing. In non -human primates, invasive electrophysiology has shown that attentional selection 

operates rhythmically, primarily within the alpha (~8 –12 Hz) and theta (~4 –5 Hz) bands. Whether such 

finely resolved control signals can be captured non -invasively in humans, and how they adapt to 

changing task demands, remains unclear. Using high -precision magnetoencephalography (MEG) 

combined with machine learning, we decoded the spatial locus of covert attention in humans 

performing three v ariants of a spatial cueing task that manipulated cue validity as well invalid trial 

switching rules .

Spatial attention could be decoded from whole -brain MEG activity at both static and time -resolved 

scales, with accuracies significantly above chance (N = 30). Decoding performance decreased as cue 

validity was reduced, indicating that task structure shapes attentional engagement. Analysis of 

decoding trajectories revealed rhythmic fluctuations at ~8 –12 Hz across all tasks, demonstrating alpha -

band sampling of attention. Pre -target attention became increasingly focused on the cued side, 

especially in the 100 % Valid condition, consistent with proactive orienting. Furthermore, individual and 

task -specific differences in decoding strength correlated with task -va riations in behavioral 

performance, linking the accuracy of neural attention codes to both discrimination accuracy and 

reaction time. 

These findings demonstrate that MEG can non -invasively capture dynamic, task -dependent 

fluctuations in spatial attention that parallel those observed in non -human primates. They reveal that 

attentional demands reshape the neural code for attention, modulate rhythmic sampling, and 

influence behavioral efficiency. This work bridges invasive primate and non -invasive h uman research 

and establishes MEG -based decoding of attention as a promising tool for mechanistic and clinical 

applications, including neurofeedback and attention -related interventions. 

## Keywords 

Spatial attention, MEG, decoding, LDA, DTT 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 24, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.23.684150 doi: bioRxiv preprint

3

## Funding: 

LABEX CORTEX funding (ANR -11 -LABX -0042) from the Université de Lyon, within the program 

In vestissements d’Avenir (ANR -11 -IDEX -0007) operated by the French National Research Agency (ANR) 

to S.B.H. and M.B. ERC starting grant (grant number  716862 ) from the European Research Council 

under the European Union’s Seventh Framework Programme (FP7/2007 –2013) attributed to M.B. 

## Author Contributions 

Conceptualization: M.B., S.B.H. 

Funding: M.B., S.B.H. 

Project supervision: M.B., S.B.H. 

Task Design: T.C., J.M., M.B. 

Pr eprocessing : M.F., D.S ., M.M. 

MEG acquisitions: T.C. , M.F. , S.D., D.S. 

Technical development: S.D., D.S. 

MEG data analysis: M.M. , M.B., S.B.H. 

Figure design: M.M. , S.B.H. 

Writing (original draft): M.M. , M.B., S.B.H. 

Review and editing: M.M., M.B., S.B.H. 

## Data and Code Availability 

Data and code will b e made available open access upon publication .

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 24, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.23.684150 doi: bioRxiv preprint

4

## Introduction 

The brain’s processing bandwidth is inherently limited, necessitating mechanisms that prioritize 

information. Selective attention fulfills this role by biasing neural resources toward behaviorally 

relevant inputs, thereby supporting adaptive p erception and decision -making. Accordingly, attention 

has become a major focus of research in both humans and animal models, and its neural 

implementation remains a central target for basic and clinical neuroscience. 

Classic theories of attention describe selection as stable in space and time. In contrast, recent 

behavioral and neural results show that attention samples the environment rhythmically. The 

frequencies most often reported are in the alpha frequency band, ~8 –12 Hz , and the theta frequency 

band, ~4–5 Hz (Crouzet and VanRullen, 2017; Fiebelkorn et al., 2013; Gaillard et al., 2020; Kienitz et al., 

2018; Landau and Fries, 2012; Spyropoulos et al., 2018; VanRullen, 2013, 2016) The specific frequency 

observed in a give n setting depend on the task difficulty and spatial organization of the task, supporting 

the idea that rhythmic attention subserves task -relevant information prioritization (Holcombe and 

Chen, 2013; Michel et al., 2020; VanRullen, 2016) . Several models have been proposed within the 

rhythmic theory of attention (Gaillard and Ben Hamed, 2022; Hamed, 2025) . One model suggests that 

attention blinks from one task -relevant spa tial location to another. VanRullen and colleagues (2018) 

proposed that perception proceeds in discrete cycles rather than continuously, with attention 

operating as a temporal filter that rhythmically modulates perceptual gain. These oscillatory cycles ,

ty pically in the theta or alpha range , are proposed to organize alternating phases of sensory 

enhancement and suppression, thereby coordinating exploration of new information and exploitation 

of task -relevant inputs (Fiebelkorn and Kastner, 2019; VanRullen, 2016, 2018) and changing the 

resolution of ongoing information processing (Michel et al., 2020) . An alternative model proposes that 

attention does not sample space through discrete perceptual cycles but rather explores it continuously 

through rhythmic attentional saccades (Gaillard et al., 2020) . Using real -time decoding of prefrontal 

activity in maca ques, they showed that the attentional spotlight follows continuous trajectory across 

visual space, with sharp directional transition, a.k.a. attentional saccades, at ~8 Hz within the alpha 

band. Even though the task designated a single behaviorally releva nt location, the decoded spotlight 

was also found at other spatial positions, eliciting inappropriate responses to task -irrelevant stimuli (Di 

Bello et al., 2022; Gaillard et al., 2020) . This rhythmic processing of space is proposed to alternate 

between exploitation of the task -relevant lo cation and exploration of surrounding space , providing a 

dynamic balance between focused goal -directed and distributed stimulus -driven processing (Di Bell o

et al., 2022; Gaillard et al., 2020) , possibly to allow rapid responses to unexpected events .

Previous work (Astrand et al., 2016; De Sousa et al., 2021) developed a precise method that enab les a

spatially and temporally resolved decoding of the locus of attentional selection , i.e. the attentional 

spotlight . T his methodological advance has deepened our understanding of the neural bases of 

attention (Amengual et al., 2022; Astrand et al., 2020; Di Bello et al., 2022) and the rhythmic nature of 

attention (Gaillard et al., 2020) . The method reads out the position of the attentional spotlight along 

the x and y axes with high spatial and high temporal precision , using signals from the prefrontal cortex 

of macaques, and relying on either multi -unit activity or local field potentials (LFP). This high resolution 

decoding has proven instrumental in reveal ing the rhythmic properties (Gaillard et al., 2020) and state -

dependent dynamics (Amengual et al., 2022) of attention, as well as in uncovering how prefrontal 

networks flexibly implement both proactive and reactive mechanisms of visual suppression (Di Bello 

et al., 2022) , and how these mechanisms dynamically interact with task -identity (Mouille et al., 2025) .

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 24, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.23.684150 doi: bioRxiv preprint

5

A key open question is how top -down control flexibly governs the dynamic spatial orientation of 

attention. Prior studies have typically used cues with 100% validity, ensuring full predictability of target 

location and thus promoting proactive orienting tow ard a single spatial goal. Under such conditions, 

attention can remain stably focused, and rhythmic fluctuations primarily reflect internal cycles of 

exploration and exploitation within the cued hemifield. However, real -world environments rarely 

afford suc h stability. When predictive information becomes uncertain, efficient behavior requires a 

more dynamic balance between maintaining focus on the most probable location and monitoring 

alternative, potentially relevant positions. To date, the precise neural m echanisms supporting this 

task -related flexibility remain unclear. Answering these questions in macaques poses practical 

challenges. Invasive electrophysiology is technically demanding and logistically intensive: animals must 

be trained on several task set s, a process that is both time -consuming and resource -heavy and may 

introduced uncontrolled for experimental biases . Moreover, resolving how task structure shapes 

attention would ideally require recordings from multiple brain areas, yet implant -based appro aches 

are necessarily restricted to a small set of regions of interest. Taken together, these constraints slow 

progress toward a fuller account of attentional mechanisms and complicate the translation of findings 

to human applications. 

In the present study , we combine high -precision magnetoencephalography (MEG) with decoding 

approaches inspired by macaque work to examine whether the rhythmic attentional spotlight can be 

reconstructed from human brain activity and how its spatial distribution, frequency and correlation 

with behavior are shaped by task structure. Unlike other whole -brain approaches in humans (e.g., EEG 

or fMRI), MEG primarily captures postsynaptic dendritic currents, signals closely related to the local 

action and field potentials used for dec oding in nonhuman primates, while offering high temporal 

resolution together with meaningful spatial resolution. This correspondence supports the translation 

of decoding strategies from macaques to humans. Using this framework, we decoded spatial attention 

across two MEG sessions and three different spatial cueing tasks with variable cue validity rules . The 

results that spatial attention can be decoded from whole -brain MEG activity with high temporal 

precision, mirroring the fine -grained intracortical findi ngs previously obtained in macaques. 

Manipulations of task structure significantly reshaped both decoding performance and the spatial 

distribution of pre -target attention, demonstrating that human cognitive flexibility modulates the 

underlying attentional code. Moreover, decoding strength correlated with behavioral performance 

(accuracy and reaction time) in a task -specific manner, indicating that the neural representation of 

attention dynamically adapts to the cognitive and predictive demands imposed by ea ch task. Finally, 

the decoded attentional signal oscillated at ~8 –12 Hz across all task variants, confirming that rhythmic 

sampling constitutes a core organizing principle of human attention, with task -dependent variations 

in oscillatory strength. 

## Methods 

## Participants 

Forty -five healthy , right -handed volunteers (19 males, 26 females, aged 26.68±0.61 years ) with normal 

or corrected -to -normal vision and no history of neurological or psychiatric disorders were included in 

the study. Five participants withdrew from the study prior to the MEG sessions reported here due to 

COVID -19 related circumstances . Additionally, five participants were excluded because of poor 

behavioral performance, and five others were excluded due to excessive technical problems with eye -

tracking data recording. This resulted in a final sample of 3 0 participants (12 males, 18 females, aged 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 24, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.23.684150 doi: bioRxiv preprint

6

27.1±0. 72 years ). All participants provided written informed con sent approved by a French Research 

Ethics Committee (reference number NCT04175119 ) in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki. 

General Procedure 

Participants completed six sessions ( MRI/ fMRI, EEG, and four MEG sessions) over a maximum three -

month period. At each session, informed consent and a COVID -19 related questionnaire were 

collected, along with additional questionnaires regarding recent sleeping behavior and lifestyle. This 

paper focuses on the last two MEG sessions examining cove rt spatial attention. 

Neuroimaging Acquisition s

MRI Data Acquisition 

We acquired structural MRI data using a 3T Magnetom Prisma scanner (Siemens Healthcare, Erlangen, 

Germany) with the body coil for radio -frequency (RF) transmission and a standard 32 -channel RF head 

coil for reception. Two scans were performed ; however, only the one relevant to the present study is 

described below . T1 -weighted scan : A 3D spoiled fast low angle shot (FLASH) sequence with 1 mm 

isotropic resolution, field -of -view of 256×256×192 mm along the anterior -posterior, head -foot, and 

right -left directions, respectively. The repetition time was 7.96 ms with an excitation flip angle of 12°. 

A high readout bandwidth (425 Hz/pixel) preserved brain morphology without geometric distortions. 

This scan, which included the participant's neck, was used for individual head -cast creation. Acquisition 

time was 3 min 42 s us ing a 32-channel head coil without padding or headphones to avoid scalp 

distortions .

MEG Recording 

Before MEG measurement, participants received instructions and completed a practice block outside 

the scanner. Once comfortable with the task, they were fitt ed with an individually -designed head -cast 

allowing to reduce head -movements within the MEG helmet , three fiducial marker coils were 

embedded into the surface of the head -casts at nasion, left and right ear canals to monitor the 

subject’s relative head motio n, and they entered the scanner room. MEG data were recorded in a 

standard magnetically shielded room consisting of two layers of μ -metal and one layer of copper 

(Vacuumschmelze, Hanau, Germany), without active shielding. The residual background magnetic field 

averaged approximately 20 nT. We used a 275 -channel SQUID -based axial gradiometer system (CTF 

MEG Neuro Innovations Inc., Port Coquitlam, BC, Canada) at 1200 Hz sampling rate. Eye movements 

were simultaneously monitor ed using an EyeLink eye tracker system (SR Research Ltd.) at a 1000 Hz 

sampling rate to ensure fixation stability. 

Experimental Design 

Participants performed three different versions of a covert spatial attention task across two MEG 

sessions. Several block s of trials were collected for each task version. We will first describe trial 

structure, then task versions, then block organization (Figure 1A -E) .

Trial structure 

Stimuli were projected to a screen of  ≈ 50 cm distance to the subject’s eyes. Throughout t he 

experiment, participants were instructed to maintain central fixation, shifting only their attention (not 

their gaze). A central fixation target designed to maximize fixation performance (Thaler et al., 2013) 

was positioned centrally. Participants were instructed to blink only after responding to avoid blinking 

before and during stimulus presentation. On each trial (Figure 1B ), after a fixation epoch of 1.2 ± 0.2s ,

two gratings appeared simultaneously at 3° eccentricity on the left and bottom visual field (3 degrees 

away from center in the x and y axis). Participants judged whether the orientation of the grating lines 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 24, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.23.684150 doi: bioRxiv preprint

7

on the cued side deviated clockwise or counterclockwise from an imaginary diagonal, responding with 

their right index or middle finger . We manipulated the predictability of grating orientation using a 

transition matrix. For the attended side only, a given grating would predict one specific grating with 

80% likelihood, another grating with the same orientation category with 10% likelihood, and the two 

gratings with opposit e orientation with 5% each (results not presented here). 

Task versions 

Task versions were defined as follows. Each grating contained a small black square (either on top or 

bottom) that served as a potential attention -switching cue. On the valid trials of e ach block, squares 

on attended gratings were positioned at the bottom while squares on unattended gratings were at the 

top. We implemented three experimental conditions or tasks that manipulated cue validity . How these 

squares were positioned on the next t rials defined the task version subjects were presented with as 

follows. 1) 100 Valid : 100% valid cues, where targets always appeared on the initially cued side (Figure 

1C ). The squares remained in their initial positions throughout the block. 2) 90 Valid -IC : 90% valid cues, 

with invalid trials (10%) signaled by the black square flipping vertically (from bottom to top) on the 

attended stimulus, requiring participants to shift attention to the opposite side (Figure 1D ).

Simultaneously, the square on th e unattended side flip ped from top to bottom. 3) 90 Valid -CC : 90% 

valid cues, with invalid trials (10%) signaled by the black square flipping vertically (from top to bottom) 

on the unattended side, requiring participants to monitor the unattended side thro ughout the block 

for possible switches (Figure 1E ). The 90 Valid -IC and 90 Valid -CC conditions were presented in 

different sessions (counterbalanced across participants) to avoid confusion. 

Bloc k organization 

Each block began with a 5 -second baseline perio d where participants fixated centrally and avoided 

blinking. They then received explicit instructions about the attention condition (attend left or right) 

and cue validity (always or mostly valid , Figure 1A ). Each trial began with a central fixation point, 

followed by simultaneous presentation of both gratings after a variable interval (1.2 ± 0.2s). 

Participants responded , using a two -button button box, as quickly and accurately as possible using 

their right -hand index finger for counter -clockwise deviation s and middle finger for clockwise 

deviations. After response, a new trial began. Each block comprised 100 trials, after which participants 

received performance feedback. Feedback on eye fixation quality throughout the block was 

additionally provided. 

The target attention side remained constant within blocks but was counterbalanced (50:50) between 

blocks. In the first session, participants completed 32 blocks of 100 trials each: 16 blocks of 100 VALID 

condition and 16 blocks of either 90 Valid -IC or 90 Valid -CC (counterbalanced across participants). 

Importantly, the first 4 blocks were always 100 Valid condition to facilitate implicit learning of the 

transition matrix. In the second session, participants completed 16 blocks of the alternate V90 

condition (either 90 Valid -IC or 90 Valid -CC , depending on what they completed in the first session). In 

total, participants performed 1600 trials per condition. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 24, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.23.684150 doi: bioRxiv preprint

8

Figure 1. Task design and experimental conditions. (A) Block structure. Participants perfor med covert spatial attention tasks 

across 16 pseudorandomized blocks per condition. Each block consisted of 100 trials in which participants were instructed to 

attend either the left or right visual field. The cued side remained constant within a block but was counterbalanced across 

blocks (50% left, 50% right). (B) Trial structure. Within a block, each trial began with a central fixation cross (duration: 1.2 ± 

0.2 s), followed by simultaneous presentation of two oriented gratings at 3° eccentricity in the left and right bottom visual 

fields. Gratings varied in orientation relative to an imaginary diagonal (45° from vertical). Each trial was categorized as E asy 

or Difficult, depending on the angular deviation of the grating lines relative to the diagonal (la rger deviations for Easy trials, 

smaller deviations for Difficult trials). Participants had to identify whether the target grating deviated clockwise or 

counterclockwise relative to this diagonal. Each grating included a small black square either at the bo ttom or top indicating 

target and distractor respectively (see Panels C –E). (C) 100 Valid cue Task. In this task, the cue indicating the attended side 

was always valid. The position of the black squares remained unchanged across all trials within a block ( bottom on the 

attended grating, top on the unattended grating). Participants could rely entirely on the initial instruction to maintain 

attention on the cued side. (D) 90 Valid -IC Task. In this task, cues were valid in 90% of trials. On 10% of trials (inva lid), the 

black square on the attended grating flipped vertically from bottom to top, while the square on the unattended grating flippe d

from top to bottom, signaling that participants should shift attention to the opposite side. This manipulation required rapid 

attentional reorienting in response to an explicit switch cue. (E) 90 Valid -CC Task. In this task, cues were also valid in 90% of 

trials. On invalid trials (10%), only the black square on the unattended grating flipped from top to bottom, requiring 

participants to monitor the unattended side throughout the block and detect these occasional changes. This manipulation 

required distributed monitoring of both attended and unattended locations. (F) Overview of decoding analysis pipeline and 

calculation of Distance to Truth (DTT). Left panel. MEG signals were extracted from visual channels in the interval from –500 

ms to +300 ms relative to stimulus onset for all trials and served as input features to the decoding model. Each trial was 

labeled according to the attended side (0 = left, 1 = right), forming the ground truth labels used for classifica tion. Middle 

panel. Linear Discriminant Analysis (LDA) decoding. At each time point, a Linear Discriminant Analysis (LDA) classifier was 

trained to discriminate left -attended versus right -attended trials. LDA generated a continuous output score ranging fro m 0 

to 1, indicating the classifier’s confidence in the right -attended label. Right panel, top. Decoding accuracy. Decoding accuracy 

(red) was computed as the proportion of trials for which the predicted label (thresholded LDA output, black curve) matched 

the true label, relative to the total number of trials. This yielded time -resolved accuracy traces quantifying classifier 

performance across the epoch. Right panel, bottom. Distance to Truth (DTT) metric. For each trial and time point, the 

classifier’s con tinuous output score was compared to the true label, and the absolute difference was calculated as the 

Distance to Truth (DTT). Lower DTT values indicate classifier outputs closer to the actual cued location, reflecting more pre cise 

attentional selection. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 24, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.23.684150 doi: bioRxiv preprint

9

Stimuli 

Stimuli consisted of four gratings with distinct orientations for each participant (Figure 1B ). The 

gratings presented 12 cycles across and were 3.5° visual angle in diameter. The grating lines were 

oriented relative to an imaginary diagonal that could be either left or right with a 45° angle relative to 

the vertical axis. The reference diagonal remained consistent for each participant throughout all 

experimental sessions but was counterbalanced across participants. Deviations from the diagonal 

cou ld be achieved by clockwise or counterclockwise rotation of the grating. The diagonal itself was not 

visible. 

During the first MEG session, 34 participants completed a staircase procedure in which the deviation 

from the diagonal was varied between ±1° and ±44°. Stimuli were presented unilaterally in the bottom 

right of the screen at 3° distance. The deviation angle that yielded 80% correct responses was selected 

as a reference for subsequent experiments. Angles derived from the "far" condition (generally la rger) 

were used as "easy" trials ( mean angle 18.35° ± 2.16 ), while those from the "close" condition (generally 

smaller) were used as "difficult" trials ( mean angle 12.42° ± 1.65 ). For 11 ( 6 of which are included in 

this work) participants , we could not perform the staircase procedure for technical reasons , we 

therefore used default angles of 30° and 15 ° for easy and difficult conditions, respectively. 

Data preprocessing 

Data were preprocessed using the FieldTrip toolbox in MATLAB. Trials were extracted from raw MEG 

recordings, and automatic artifact rejection was applied to eliminate prominent signal artifacts. Eye -

tracking data were analyzed to identify and remove trials containing blinks at any point or saccades 

exceeding 1.5° from central fixation. We specifically excluded trials containing blinks or saccades within 

the critical interval from 500 ms pre -stimulus to stimulus onset. Only trials with correct responses were 

included in further analyses, as correct responses indicated effective attentional allocation to the cued 

side. 

Behavioral analysis 

Behavioral analyses were performed on reaction time (RT) and response accuracy data for each 

participant and task. Only cor rect -response trials were included in the RT analysis. Trials were 

categorized as easy or difficult based on the target grating’s orientation degree relative to the diagonal, 

and as congruent (CS) or incongruent (IS) according to whether the target and dis tractor orientations 

matched. 

Valid trials 

For valid trials, we used a three -way repeated -measures ANOVA with within -subject factors Task (100 

Valid, 90 Valid –IC, 90 Valid –CC ), Difficulty (Easy, Difficult), and Congruency (CS, IS). The dependent 

variable w as the median RT for each condition and participant. Separate ANOVAs were conducted for 

RT and accuracy. When assumptions of sphericity were violated, Greenhouse –Geisser corrections 

were applied. Follow -up pairwise comparisons were conducted using two -side d Wilcoxon signed -rank 

tests to assess the effects of Difficulty (Easy vs. Difficult) and Congruency (CS vs. IS) within each task. 

Invalid trials 

Invalid (switch) trials from the 90 Valid –IC and 90 Valid –CC tasks were analyzed separately to assess 

behavioral effects during attentional reorienting. The same three -way repeated -measures ANOVA 

structure was applied, with within -subject factors Task (90 Valid –IC , 90 Valid –CC ), Difficulty (Easy, 

Difficult), and Co ngruency (CS, IS), using median RTs (correct trials only) and accuracy as dependent 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 24, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.23.684150 doi: bioRxiv preprint

10 

variables. Post hoc Wilcoxon signed -rank tests were performed to evaluate pairwise comparisons for 

Difficulty and Congruency within each task and, where relevant, to explor e task × factor interactions. 

Pre -target alpha‐band lateralization across tasks 

As a sanity check, we examined whether the data exhibited the expected prestimulus alpha‐band 

lateralization in the occipito -parietal channels . We computed time –frequency rep resentations (TFRs) 

of the raw MEG signal separately for trials in which attention was cued to the left versus the right visual 

field and then plotted their contrast (left – right) in the interval of 500ms before target onset to target 

onset. Figure S1 , pa nel A and B correspond to the TFR of this contrast for left and right hemisphere 

channels respectively across all three tasks separately. Panel C demonstrates the topoplot of the 

contrast TFR in the interval of -100ms to 0 across frequency range of 11 to 1 3 Hz. This contrast revealed 

the canonical pattern of hemispheric alpha modulation: alpha power increased over posterior sensors 

contralateral to the distractor and decreased contralateral to the attended (target) side. This pattern 

confirms the expected p restimulus alpha lateralization associated with spatial attention. 

Decoding Spatial Attention 

To decode the attended location (left vs. right) from MEG data, we applied two complementary Linear 

Discriminant Analysis (LDA) methods. MEG signals were extracte d from visual channels in the interval 

from –500 ms to +300 ms relative to stimulus onset for all trials. A 50 -ms sliding window was applied 

with a 5 -ms step size, resulting in time -resolved data segments that served as input features to the 

decoding model . These served as input features to the LDA (Figure 1F , left panel) . Each trial was labeled 

according to the attended side (0 = left, 1 = right), forming the ground truth labels used for 

classification . LDA identifies neural patterns distinguishing predefined classes by maximizing the ratio 

of between -class variance to within -class variance, formalized by: 

J(𝐰 ) = 𝐰 T𝑺 𝐵 𝐰 

𝐰 T𝑺 𝑊 𝐰 

where 𝐰 is the discriminant vector, 𝑺 𝐵 denotes the between -class scatter matrix, and 𝑺 𝑊 denotes the 

wi thin -class scatter matrix (Figure 1F , middle panel ). 

Static Decoding 

We computed mean neural activity for each MEG visual channel over four pre -stimulus windows (50 

ms, 100 ms, 200 ms, and 300 ms before stimulus onset). For each window, we applied a Hann w indow 

by weighting the samples within the segment, normalizing the weights to sum to 1, and computing the 

resulting weighted mean amplitude per channel. For each participant and each time window, a linear 

discriminant analysis (LDA) classifier was trained to decode the attended side using these mean 

amplitudes as features. Decoding performance was calculated separately for each window length and 

each task condition ( 100 Valid , 90 Valid -IC , and 90 Valid -CC ). 

Time -Resolved decoding 

To examine the temporal dynamics of attentional allocation, we implemented a sliding window 

analysis using 50 ms windows shifted in 5 ms increments from –500 ms to +300 ms relative to stimulus 

onset. Within each window, a Hann window was applied to weight the samples before averaging, 

producing a weighted mean amplitude per channel per time point. These measures were used as 

features in an LDA classifier to generate continuous decoding accuracy time courses for each condition 

(100 Valid , 90 Valid -IC , and 90 Valid -CC ). Decoding accuracy was computed as the proportion of trials 

for which the predicted label (thresholded score) matched the true label, divided by the total number 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 24, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.23.684150 doi: bioRxiv preprint

11 

of trials. This yielded time -resolved accuracy traces quantifying classifier perfor mance across the epoch 

(Figure 1F , top right panel ). Statistical significance at each time point was determined by comparing 

observed decoding accuracies against the null distribution from permutation tests, with multiple 

comparison correction applied usin g Bonferroni adjustment. 

Distance to Truth (DTT) and Spatial Distribution of Attention 

We quantified moment -by -moment attentional alignment using the Distance to Truth (DTT), defined 

as the absolute difference between the classifier’s output probability (r anging from 0 to 1) and the 

true trial label (0 for left, 1 for right). Lower DTT values indicate closer alignment between neural 

representations and the attended side (Figure 1F ).

Correlation between decoding performance and behavior 

To examine whether ne ural decoding of spatial attention predicts behavioral performance, we 

assessed across -participant correlations between decoding accuracy and behavioral measures 

(reaction time and response accuracy) for each task. Decoding accuracy values were averaged wi thin 

three 100 -ms time windows of interest: a pre -target window (−125 to −25 ms) associated with 

attention orientation just prior to target presentation , a window around the decoding peak (150 –250 

ms) and associated with target attentional processing , and a late window (350 –450 ms) associated 

with attention reorienting -related activity that is the case for invalid trials .

For each participant, task, and time window, we computed differences in decoding and behavioral 

performance relative to the 100 Valid task, which served as the reference condition (ΔDecoding = 100 

Valid − 90 Valid ; ΔBehavior = 100 Valid − 90 Valid ). This normalization captured individual deviations 

in neural and behavioral performance from the baseline condition in which cue validity was perfect. 

Behavioral measures were taken from both valid and invalid trials of the 90 Valid -IC and 90 Valid -CC 

tasks. 

To avoid circularity, decoding models were trained on all trials and tested within su bsets defined by 

task difficulty (easy vs. difficult) and congruency (CS vs. IS). There was no redundance between training 

and testing trials. Because behavioral accuracy varies most meaningfully on difficult trials, while 

reaction times (RTs) are more rel iable on easy trials, correlations between decoding and accuracy were 

computed for difficult trials, and correlations between decoding and RT were computed for easy trials. 

Correlations were calculated separately for IS and CS trials. However, as IS trials more directly reflect 

attention to the target rather than the distractor, results from IS conditions are reported in the main 

text, while analyses for CS trials are presented in the Supplementary Information as a control (Figure 

S4).

For each combination of task ( 100 Valid, 90 Valid -IC, 90 Valid -CC ), trial validity (valid, invalid), and time 

window, Pearson’s correlations were computed across participants between ΔDecoding and 

ΔBehavior between the pair of task s being considered . The correlation coefficien t ( r) and its 

corresponding p-value were taken directly from the correlation test output. For valid trials, stronger 

decoding differences (reflecting greater attentional bias) were expected to correlate with slower RTs 

and lower accuracy; for invalid trial s, the opposite relationship was predicted, reflecting more efficient 

reorienting from the cued to the uncued location. Bonferroni correction was applied within each 

behavioral endpoint (RT or accuracy) to account for multiple comparisons across tasks and time 

windows (α = 0.0083). 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 24, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.23.684150 doi: bioRxiv preprint

12 

Time -Frequency Analysis of DTT 

To investigate potential oscillatory components underlying attentional dynamics, we computed time –

frequency representations (TFRs) of the decoding -derived DTT time series for each single trial, subject, 

and task using the Superlet transform (SLT ) (Moca et al., 2021) . The analysis covered a frequency range 

of 3 –40 Hz, with SLT parameters set to base cycles = 1, minimum order = 3, and maximum order = 20. 

TFRs were computed over a –900 to +300 ms interval relative to target onset, with an extended pre -

stimulus window included to minimize edge effects. 

For each subject and condition, we obtained the median TFR across trials and applied a spectral 

parametrization using the “ Fitting Oscillations & One -Over -F” or FOOOF algorithm (Donoghue et al., 

2020) to separate periodic from aperiodic (1/f) components, retaining the periodic power spectrum 

for subsequent analysis. The same proce dure was performed for both the attention decoding DTT and 

a control DTT (decoding distractor difficulty), allowing us to isolate oscillatory components specifically 

linked to attentional processes. 

We computed the log -transformed contrast between attentio n and control TFRs (log[Att] − log[Ctrl]) 

for each subject to quantify condition -specific changes in oscillatory power. Group -level statistical 

testing was performed using a non -parametric cluster -based permutation test (Maris and Oostenveld, 

2007) as implemented in MNE -Python. The test used a one -tailed permutation_cluster_1samp_test 

(tail = 1) with a threshold -free cluster en hancement (TFCE; start = 0, step = 0.2), 1000 permutations, 

and an adjacency matrix defining neighboring time –frequency points. Significant clusters were 

identified based on corrected p-values (Att > Ctrl). 

Group -level TFRs were visualized by computing the median of individual log -contrast TFRs across 

subjects and highlighting clusters that reached statistical significance. To quantify alpha -band effects, 

we extracted median power within the late pre -target interval (−175 to −25 ms) and averaged over the 

10 –12 Hz frequency range for each participant. These values were visualized using half -violin plots, 

with individual data points shown as dots and the group median indicated by a solid horizontal line. 

For statistical comparisons across tasks, we performed a Friedman test on the within -subject alpha -

band log -contrast values, followed by two -tailed Wilcoxon signed -rank tests for post hoc pairwise 

comparisons. Bonferroni correction was applied to adjust for three task comparisons (α = 0.0167). All 

analyses were performed in log space; dB visualizations correspond to 10× the same log -contrast 

values and do not affect the underlying statistics. 

Statistic s and software 

All reported summary values are medians ± standard error of the median (s.e.m.) , and all statis tical 

tests were non -parametric due to non -normal data distributions. Pairwise comparisons were 

evaluated using Wilcoxon signed -rank tests , and omnibus effects were assessed using Friedman’s tests .

Bonferroni correction was applied for post hoc multiple comparisons unless otherwise specified. 

MEG preprocessing and alpha lateralization visualizations were performed in MATLAB R2023a (The 

MathWorks, Natick, MA) using the FieldTrip toolbox (release 20211102) .

Decoding analyses (both static and time -resolved ) and DTT distribution analyses were conducted in 

MATLAB R2023a . Statistical significance for decoding was evaluated using permutation tests (1,000 

iterations with randomly shuffled trial labels) to estimate chance -level performance and generate 95% 

confidence intervals . For time -resolved decoding , repeated non -parametric tests were performed 

across time points and corrected using the Benjamini –Hochberg false discovery rate (FDR) procedure, 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 24, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.23.684150 doi: bioRxiv preprint

13 

which is more appropriate for partially dependent samples (a rising from overlapping sliding windows) 

than Bonferroni correction. 

Time –frequency analyses of the DTT time series were performed in Python 3.12.2. For each subject 

and tas k, superlet -based time –frequency representations (TFRs) were computed as periodic 

(aperiodic -removed) log -power matrices (frequency × time) for attention and control trials. The group 

contrast was defined per bin as the median of per -subject differences (median of [attention − control]). 

Statistical inference tested the paired, one -taile d effect (Attention > Control) within –475 to –25 ms 

using TFCE -based cluster permutation in MNE -Python v1.2.3 (permutation_cluster_1samp_test ) with 

1000 permutations , TFCE start = 0, step = 0.2 , 2-D frequency×time adjacency (combine_adjacency ), 

seed = 42 , and cluster -level α = 0.0 5 (FWER). 

## Results 

Participants performed a covert spatial attention task while undergoing MEG recordings (Figure 1 ). On 

each trial, two oriented gratings (target and distractor) appeared simultaneously to the left and right 

of central fixation in the lower visual field, with each positioned 3° to the left or right of central fixation, 

respectively. Participants discriminated the orientation of the grating on the cued side (target) relative 

to an imaginary diagonal reference, ind icating whether it deviated clockwise or counterclockwise. To 

manipulate attentional demands, three cue validity tasks were implemented: a fully valid task in which 

targets always appeared on the initially cued side (100 Valid), and two 90% valid tasks. In the 90 Valid -

IC task (for ipsi -cue 90% Validity task), 90% of trials were valid and invalid trials were signaled by the 

black square on the attended stimulus flipping position, requiring participants to shift their attention 

to the opposite side when the cue changed. In this task, the optimal strategy consisted in monitoring 

the cued grating. In contrast, in the 90 Valid -CC task (for contra -cue 90% Validity task), invalid trials 

were indicated by a cue flip on the unattended stimulus, requiring participant s to monitor the 

unattended side throughout the block for potential switches. In this task, the optimal strategy 

consisted in monitoring both the cued grating (to track valid trials) and the uncued grating (to track 

invalid trials). Eye movements were cont inuously monitored to ensure central fixation throughout the 

task. For all analyses, only trials in which no saccades occurred ( exceeding 1.5° from central fixation )

in the 500 ms preceding target onset and no blinks were detected in this interval were inc luded. Below, 

we report the results obtained from these analyses. 

Behavioral performance varied as a function of task 

Before examining neural decoding, we first verified that manipulations of cue validity and switching 

rule effectively modulated behavioral performance, confirming that participants adapted their 

attentional strategy to each task’s demands. Reaction times and accuracy were therefore analyzed to 

assess how task structure influenced perceptual performance and attentional control when target was 

presented at the cued location . Reaction times (RTs) were first examined for valid trials across tasks 

(Figure 2A ). A repeated -measures ANOVA revealed significant main effects of Task (F(2, 58) = 17.33, p 

= 1.26 × 10⁻⁶) and Difficulty (F(1, 29) = 28.07, p = 1.11 × 10⁻⁵), indicating slower responses in the 90 

Valid tasks and for difficult trials. No main effect of Congruency was observed (p = 0.153) . N o

interactions reached significance (all p > 0.27). Post hoc Wilcoxon signed -rank tests confirmed that RTs 

were longer for difficult than easy trials across all tasks (all p ≤ 0.0001). Small congruency effects were 

found for easy trials in the 100 Valid (p = 0.0098) and 90 Valid –CC (p = 0.0387) tasks, with IS trials 

slightly slower than CS trials. Overall, increased perceptual difficulty reliably slowed behavioral 

responses under all cue -validity conditions, whereas stimulus congruency had only a minor influence 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 24, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.23.684150 doi: bioRxiv preprint

14 

on RTs during valid trials , indicating that su bjects were correctly performing the task and were not 

driven in their response by the uncued grating change .

A 3 -factor RM -ANOVA on proportion correct with factors Task (100 Valid, 90 Valid -IC, 90 Valid -CC) × 

Difficulty (Easy, Difficult) × Congruency (CS , IS) revealed robust main effects of Difficulty (F≈73.99, 

p≈1.8×10 ⁻⁹) and Congruency (F≈12.42, p≈0.0014). The Difficulty × Congruency interaction was 

significant (F≈14.34, p≈7.1×10 ⁻⁴), indicating that the congruency effect was stronger on Difficult than 

Easy trials. The Task main effect and Task × Difficulty and Task × Congruency interactions were not 

significant, but the three -way Task × Difficulty × Congruency interaction reached significance with 

Greenhouse –Geisser correction (p≈0.047), motivating task -wise follow -ups. Post -hoc tests within tasks 

showed clear congruency effects on 90 Valid -IC (Easy: M = 0.012, SD = 0.026, p = 0.0201; Difficult: M = 

0.036, SD = 0.051, p = 0.0005) and on 90 Valid -CC for Difficult trials (M = 0.036, SD = 0.055, p = 0.0012), 

but not for Easy trials (M = 0.001, SD = 0.023, p = 0.7483). Consistent Wilcoxon signed -rank tests 

confirmed lower accuracy on Difficult vs Easy trials within each task (all p < 0.001) and a reliable CS –IS 

difference on Difficult trials (all p ≤ 0.0013), with smaller or absent CS –IS differences on Easy trials 

(significant only for 90 Valid -IC, p = 0.0034). In summary, v alid -trial accuracy decreases with difficulty, 

and congruency costs are most evident on difficult conditions, especially in the 90 Valid -IC and 90 Valid -

CC tasks .

Ov er all , these results confirmed that subjects’ reaction time and behavioral accuracies were impacted 

by task design. Behavioral performance for invalidly cued targets are presented in a later section. 

Figure 2. (A) Behavioral results across tasks. Median reaction times (RT; top) and performance accuracy (bottom) for valid 

trials across three cue -validity tasks: 100 Valid , 90 Valid -IC , and 90 Valid -CC . Within each task, data are shown separately for 

Easy and Difficult conditions and for Congruent (CS) and Incongruent (IS) stimulus categories. Violin plots depict the 

distribution of participant medians; solid horizontal lines indicate group medians, dots represent individual participants, and 

gray connecto r lines link values from the same participant across conditions. Paired Wilcoxon signed -rank tests were used 

for statistical comparisons ( p < 0.05 (*) , p < 0.01 (**) , p < 0.001 (***), n.s. = not significant). (B) Static decoding for different 

pre -stimulus window lengths. Mean neural activity was computed for each MEG visual channel over four pre -stimulus 

windows of 50 ms, 100 ms, 200 ms, and 300 ms before stimulus onset. For each participant and each time window, an LDA 

classifier was trained to decode the cued side using these mean amplitudes as features. Decoding performance was calculated 

separately for each window length and task condition (100 Valid, 90 Valid -IC, 90 Valid -CC). Statistical significance was assessed 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 24, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.23.684150 doi: bioRxiv preprint

15        

> using permutation tests (1,000 iteratio ns with randomly shuffled trial labels) to estimate chance levels and generate 95%
> confidence intervals. (C) Time -resolved decoding of visual channels group -level results. Left panel. Time -resolved decoding
> accuracy for the 100 Valid task. The gray solid l ine shows the median (+/ -s.e.) decoding performance across participants at
> each time point relative to stimulus onset (0 ms). The gray line indicates the median of the 95% confidence intervals across
> subjects. Solid black horizontal line segments mark tim e intervals where decoding performance was significantly above
> chance level (Wilcoxon signed -rank tests with Bonferroni correction). The vertical black dashed line at 0 ms denotes the time
> of target presentation. Middel panel. Same as left panel, for the 9 0 Valid -IC task. Right panel. Same as left panel, for the 90
> Valid -CC task.

Spatial attention can be decoded from the MEG sensor -level signals 

We first tested whether spatial attention could be reliably decoded from temporal MEG activity 

patterns extracted from the visual occipital and parietal sensors . Decoding from non -visual or all 

sensors is occasionally reported for comparison. Using Linear Discriminant Analysis (LDA), classifiers 

were trained to discriminate whether attention was directed to the left or right grating on each trial. 

We first examined static decoding performance across increasing pre -stimulus integration windows to 

determine the temporal scale over which attention -related signals are optimally expressed in the MEG 

data. We then extended this approach to a time -resolved decoding analysis to capture the moment -

to -moment evolution of attentional allocation. By applying a sliding -window classifier across the pre -

target interval, we could track how the discriminability of left - versu s right -attended trials fluctuated 

over time, thereby revealing the temporal dynamics and rhythmic structure of the attentional code 

preceding stimulus onset. 

Static decoding 

Decoding accuracy was computed within pre -stimulus windows ranging from 50 to 300 ms ( Figure 2B ). 

Across all tasks, accuracy was significantly above chance (all p < 0.0125; Bonferroni -corrected α =

0.0125, permutation -based Wilcoxon tests). A Friedman test confirmed a strong effect of window 

length on decoding accuracy (p < 1 × 10⁻⁴ ). Post hoc one -tailed Wilcoxon signed -rank tests (Bonferroni -

corrected α = 0.0083) revealed significant increases from 50 ms to 100 ms (p < 1 × 10⁻⁴), 50 ms to 200 

ms (p < 1 × 10⁻⁴), 100 ms to 200 ms (p < 1 × 10⁻⁴), 50 ms to 300 ms (p < 1 × 10⁻⁴), and 100 ms to 300 

ms (p < 1 × 10⁻⁴), whereas the increment from 200 ms to 300 ms did not reach significance (p = 0.4284). 

Thus, decoding accuracy increased with longer integration windows, plateauing beyond 200 ms. Taken 

together, these results mirroring the intr acortical attention decoding studies (Astrand et al., 2016; 

Gaillard et al., 2020) , and demonstrate that spatial attention can be robustly decoded from visual 

sensor -level MEG activity, with decoding strength i ncreasing for longer pre -target integration windows 

and remaining consistently above chance across all tasks .

Time -resolved decoding 

A complementary group -level time -resolved analysis ( Figure 2C ) using 50 ms sliding Hann -weighted 

windows (5 ms steps) revea led that decoding accuracy dynamically evolved throughout the pre -target 

period. Permutation testing (1,000 label shuffles) was used to derive subject -specific 95% confidence 

intervals, and intervals of significant above -chance decoding were identified via Wilcoxon signed -rank 

tests with Benjamini –Hochberg correction. Solid black lines on the traces indicate time points where 

decoding accuracy exceeded chance. As can be seen in Figure 2C , at the group level, time -resolved 

decoding was significant across all time points from pre -cue to post cue interval, to the exception of a 

few time points in the very early pre -target interval in the 90 Valid tasks). Importantly, s ingle -subject 

examples ( Figure 3A , supplementary Figure S2) illustrate consistent above -chance decoding across all 

task conditions for most subjects , possibly indicating a correlation between decoding accuracy and 

behavioral performance. This will be addressed in the next sections . When all channels were u sed for 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 24, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.23.684150 doi: bioRxiv preprint

16 

the decoding, a similar result as reported in Figure 2C is observed ( Figure S3 , bottom panel). Exclusively 

considering non -visual channels deteriorated decoding significance, mostly in the pre -target epoch 

(Figure S3 , top panel). Together, these results demonstrate that the spat ial attention orientation can 

be reliably decoded from human MEG signals with high temporal precision, primarily driven by activity 

in visual sensors, and that this decoding remains robust across individuals and task variants. 

Reduced cue validity weakens neural discriminability 

Having established that spatial attention can be robustly decoded across tasks, we next investigated 

whether task structure , as defined by cue validity and switching rules , modulates overall decoding 

strength of the attentional sign al. We thus examined differences in decoding accuracy between tasks 

irrespective of window size. A Friedman test revealed a significant effect of task ( χ²(2) = 12.87, p = 

0.0016), with median decoding accuracy of 59.88% (IQR = 57.04 –61.92%) for the 100 Val id task, 58.17% 

(IQR = 55.98 –60.21%) for the 90 Valid -IC task, and 57.85% (IQR = 55.97 –60.10%) for the 90 Valid -CC 

task. Pairwise Wilcoxon signed -rank tests with Bonferroni correction ( α = 0.0167) showed that 

decoding accuracy was significantly higher for 100 Valid compared to both 90 Valid -IC (p = 0.0009) and 

90 Valid -CC (p = 0.0003), whereas the difference between 90 Valid -IC and 90 Valid -CC was not 

significant (p = 0.5857). To investig ate task differences within each specific window size (50, 100, 200, 

and 300 ms before target onset), additional pairwise Wilcoxon signed -rank tests with Bonferroni 

correction (α = 0.0167) were conducted. Significant reductions in decoding accuracy from 10 0 Valid to 

90 Valid -IC were observed at all window sizes (50 ms: p = 0.0171, 100 ms: p = 0.0005, 200 ms: p = 

0.0024, 300 ms: p = 0.0014). Similarly, decoding accuracy was significantly lower in 90 Valid -CC 

compared to 100 Valid across all windows (50 ms: p = 0.0026, 100 ms: p = 0.0006, 200 ms: p = 0.0027, 

300 ms: p = 0.0029). In contrast, no significant differences were found between 90 Valid -IC and 90 

Valid -CC at any window size (all p > 0.33). These results demonstrate that reducing cue validity reliably 

diminishes the strength of the neural attention code, whereas differences arising from rule switching 

will be uncovered in subsequent analyses.         

> Figure 3. Time -resolved decoding and DTT distributions for an example subject. (A) Decoding performance over t ime for
> each of the three tasks for subject 126. All as in figure 2C. (B) Time series of average DTT values across all trials for each task.
> The shaded light gray area indicates the early analysis window ( –475 ms to –325 ms), and the shaded dark gray area marks
> the late window ( –175 ms to –25 ms), immediately preceding target onset. Lower DTT values reflect classifier outputs closer
> to the true attended side, indicating more precise attentional allocation. (C) Probability density distributions of DTT values
> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 24, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.23.684150 doi: bioRxiv preprint

17 

within the early (light gray) and late (dark gray) windows for each task. The dashed vertical line at 0.5 indicates a DTT 

equidistant to both left and right cued locations. 

Attention is more aligned with the cued target in Late window but effect differs across tasks 

Because decoding accuracy provides a binary measure of classifier performance that may obscure trial -

by -trial variability in attentional precision as well as within -trial attentional dynamics , we next 

examined the Distance to Truth (DTT) metric , a continuous index of how closely the classifier output 

aligns with the true attended location , to capture finer -grained changes in attentional focus over time. 

We examine d how attentional allocation evolved as the target onset approached, and we c ompared 

DTT values between an early (−475 to −325 ms) and a late (−175 to −25 ms) pre -target window . Figure 

3B illustrates, for a representative subject, a single trial DTT trace in time (top panel) as well as the 

probability distributions of DTT across tr ials in the early and late pre -target windows . DTT probability 

distributions were significantly smaller in the late window as compared to the early window, indicating 

that attention was significantly closer to the cued target in the later window. 

This obs ervation was confirmed a cross subjects . Indeed, at the group level, Wilcoxon signed -rank tests 

confirmed significant reductions in DTT from the early to late window in the 100 Valid (p = 0.002) and 

90 Valid –IC (p = 0.017) tasks, thus reflecting a shift of attentional focus toward the target side. This 

was however not the case for the 90 Valid –CC task as DTT decrease from the early to late window did 

not reach significance (p = 0.318; Figure 4A ). 

Figure 4. Median DTT comparisons across early and late pre -stimulus intervals. (A) Left panel, Scatter plot showing, for each 

subject, the median DTT in the early window ( –475 to –325 ms) versus in the late window ( –175 to -25 ms) for the 100 Valid 

task (p -value, Wilcoxon signed -rank test). Each star represents one participant. The diagonal dashed line indicates equality 

between early and late medians. Points falling below the diagonal reflect trials where DTT decreased (i.e., attention became 

more aligned with the cued target) closer to stimulus onset. Middle panel, same as left panel, but for the 90 Valid -IC task. 

Right panel, same as left panel, but for the 90 Valid -CC task. (B) Distribution plots of the within -subject differences in median 

DTT between the late and early windows for each task. For each participant, the median DTT in the early win dow was 

subtracted from the median DTT in the late window, such that negative values indicate a reduction in DTT over time (i.e., 

improved attentional alignment). Half violin plots illustrate the distribution of these differences across subjects for each 

condition. Small dots show individual data points, with connecting lines linking the tasks within each participant. Horizontal 

colored lines indicate median differences per condition. The dashed line at zero represents no change in DTT. * p < 0.05, ** 

p < 0 .01, *** p < 0.001 (Wilcoxon rank -sum tests with Bonferroni correction for multiple comparisons); “n.s.” denotes no 

significant difference between conditions. (C) Comparison of late -window attentional alignment between tasks. This figure 

shows the proporti on of DTT values exceeding 0.5 during the late pre -stimulus window ( –175 to –25 ms) for each subject and 

task: dark gray (100 Valid); dark blue (90 Valid -IC) and light blue (90 Valid -CC). Individual subject values are represented as 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 24, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.23.684150 doi: bioRxiv preprint

18  

> dots, with gray connect ing lines linking measurements between tasks for each participant. Horizontal colored lines within
> each half -violin indicate the median proportion per condition. * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001 (Wilcoxon rank -sum tests
> with Bonferroni correction for multiple comparisons).

To test whether this temporal change differed across tasks, we computed for each participant the 

Late –Early DTT difference and compared these values using one -tailed paired Wilcoxon signed -rank 

tests with Bonferroni correction ( α = 0.0167). The decline was significantly stronger in the 100 Valid 

task compared to the 90 Valid –CC task (p = 0.0090, z = −2.37), while differences between 100 Valid 

and 90 Valid –IC (p = 0.1938, z = −0.86) and between 90 Valid –IC and 90 Valid –CC (p = 0.0721, z = −1.46) 

were not significant. A Friedman test across tasks approached significance ( χ²(2) = 5.40, p = 0.0672), 

suggesting a trend toward task -dependent modulation of the DTT decline ( Figure 4B ). Overall, DTT 

values decreased as the moment of target pre sentation neared, consistent with a growing attentional 

bias toward the target location. Although the overall task effect did not reach statistical significance, 

the observed pattern supports the hypothesis that this attentional bias was strongest under fu lly valid 

cueing (100 Valid) and weakened progressively with reduced cue validity (90 Valid –IC, 90 Valid –CC). 

Dwell time contralateral to the cued location varies as a function of the task 

To further characterize how task demands influenced the spatial dyn amics of attention, we next 

examined the dwell time of the decoded attentional spotlight , that is, how long attention remained 

contralateral versus ipsilateral to the cued location during the late pre -target interval. Building on the 

previous analyses, we quantified the proportion of time points within the late pre -target window (−175 

to −25 ms) in which the DTT was positioned contralateral to the cued location —that is, instances where 

attentional tracking crossed the midline ( Figure 4C ). For each participa nt and task, this proportion was 

calculated as the fraction of DTT values exceeding the midline threshold (0.5). Consistent with the task 

design, we expected more frequent midline crossings in conditions with reduced cue validity. A 

Friedman test revealed a significant overall task effect ( χ²(2) = 13.07, p = 0.00145). Post hoc one -tailed 

Wilcoxon signed -rank tests (Bonferroni -corrected α = 0.0167) confirmed higher proportions of midline -

crossing DTTs in both the 90 Valid –IC (p = 0.0162, r = 0.391) and 90 Va lid –CC (p = 0.0002, r = 0.642) 

tasks compared with the 100 Valid task , indicating medium and large effects, respectively. The 

difference between the two 90 Valid tasks was close to significance (p = 0.0666, r = 0.274). These results 

confirm a reliable incr ease in midline -crossing DTTs under conditions of reduced cue validity, with the 

strongest effect observed in the 90 Valid -CC task . This is in agreement with the difference in task rule 

switching differences between the 90 Valid -IC and 90 Valid -CC tasks. Indeed, in the 90 Valid –CC task ,

participants were required to continuously monitor the unattended side for potential cue flips, 

pro moting a more distributed or exploratory attentional strategy and resulting in more frequent 

midline crossings. In contrast, the 90 Valid –IC task primarily engaged reactive shifts of attention in 

response to explicit switch cues, yielding comparatively few er cross -hemifield transitions , although 

subjects might have engaged weaker attentional engagement at the cued location in order to promote 

faster switching reaction times . Together, these findings indicate that when cue reliability decreases 

and task rule s encourage sustained monitoring of multiple spatial locations, the decoded attentional 

spotlight becomes more labile and less tightly anchored to the cued target position. 

Decoding of spatial attention correlates with behavioral performance 

Having establi shed that task structure modulates the strength and spatial dynamics of attentional 

decoding, we next asked whether variability in neural decoding strength translates into behavioral 

performance differences. If the fidelity of the decoded attentional signa l reflects the precision of 

attentional deployment, stronger decoding should be associated with faster and more accurate 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 24, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.23.684150 doi: bioRxiv preprint

19 

responses. To test this hypothesis, we examined across -participant correlations between decoding 

accuracy and behavioral measures (reac tion time and accuracy) across tasks and time windows. 

To assess the link between neural decoding strength and behavior, we examined across -participant 

correlations between changes in decoding accuracy and behavioral measures, normalized to the 100 

Valid task ( i.e. ΔDecoding = 100 Valid − 90 Valid vs. ΔBehavior = 100 Valid − 90 Valid ). Correlations 

were computed separately for the 90 Valid –IC and 90 Valid –CC tasks . Because easy target trials 

resulted in only subtle differences in accuracy across tasks, we f ocused, for these trials, on RTs. In 

contrast on difficult target trials, differences in accuracy were highly task dependent while reaction 

times were overall slowed down. As a result, for these difficult trials, we focused on accuracy 

variations. Last, we focused on IS trials as these unambiguously identified correct trials as compared 

to CS trials in which the overt response could have been influenced by either the target or the 

distractor. All non -reported conditions are nonetheless presented in suppleme ntary material. Three 

100 -ms temporal windows were tested (−125 to −25 ms, corresponding to pre -target epoch; 150 –250 

ms, corresponding to initial attentional capture by attention; and 350 –450 ms , corresponding to 

putative attentional capture following attentional switches, see supplementary Figure S4 and 

associated description ), with Bonferroni correction applied across tasks × windows ( α = 0.0083). We 

first focused on valid trials, where decodin g strength directly indexes the efficiency of sustained 

attention toward the cued target, before turning to invalid trials, which probe how attentional bias 

and flexibility influence reorienting performance under changing task demands. 

Behavioral relevance of attentional decoding under valid cueing 

We examined , in valid trials, whether fluctuations in attention decoding strength predicted individual 

differences in behavioral accuracy and reaction time across tasks. We first focused on difficult IS trials 

(Figure 5A , corresponding analyses for CS trials are presented in supplementary Figure S 5). A 

significant positive correlation was observed between differences in behavioral accuracy between the 

100 Valid and the 90 Valid –CC task during the pre -targ et (−125 to −25 ms, p = 0.0018) and between 

the 100 Valid and the 90 Valid –IC task during the pre -target (150 –250 ms, p = 0.0045) windows, 

indicating that greater reductions in decoding were associated with larger accuracy losses relative to 

the 100 Valid baseline ( Figure 5A ). No other task –window combination reached significance (all p ≥ 

0.01). We next focused on easy IS trials ( Figure 5 B). No significant correlations were observed after 

correction (all p ≥ 0.01). Thus, overall, during valid trials, reduced attentional decoding in the 90 Valid 

tasks reliably tracked decreases in behavioral accuracy, whereas corresponding RT effects were not 

significant. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 24, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.23.684150 doi: bioRxiv preprint

20 

Figure 5. Correlation between decoding and behavioral differences across tasks for valid trials. (A) Correlation between 

changes in decoding accuracy and behavioral performance (accuracy) across participants for the Difficult –IS condition. (B) 

Correlation between changes in decoding accuracy and reaction RT for the Easy –IS condition. For each particip ant, differences 

were computed relative to the 100 Valid task , using it as a reference for valid trials from the 90 Valid -IC and 90 Valid -CC tasks. 

Correlations are shown for three temporal decoding windows ([ -125, −25], [150, 250], [350, 450] ms). Each do t represents 

one participant; solid lines denote least -squares linear fits. Pearson’s r, p-values, and sample sizes ( n) are reported within 

each panel. Participants with accuracy below 50% or RTs exceeding ± 2 s.d. of the median in valid trials were excluded from 

the respective analyses. 

Behavioral relevance of attentional decoding under in valid cueing and switch instruction 

We next investigated whether the relationship between decoding strength and behavior extended to 

invalid (switch) trials, which required participants to reorient attention in response to a cue change. 

These trials provide a complementary test of attentional flexibility, probing whether stronger neural 

bias toward the unattended side facilitates faster and more accurate reorienting when the target 

unexpectedly appears there. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 24, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.23.684150 doi: bioRxiv preprint

21 

Figure 6. (A) Behavioral results across 90 validity tasks. Median reaction times (RT; top) and performance accuracy (bottom) 

for Invalid trials across 90 Valid -IC , and 90 Valid -CC tasks . Within each task, data are shown separately for Easy and Difficult 

conditions and for CS and IS stimulus categories. Violin plots depict the distribution of participant medians; solid horizontal 

lines indicate group medians, dots represent individual participants, and gray connector lines link values from the same 

participant across conditions. Paired Wilcoxon signed -rank tests were used for statistical comparisons ( p < 0.05 (*) , p < 0.01 

(**) , p < 0.001 (***), n.s. = not signific ant). (B) Decoding performance for valid (gray line) vs Invalid (black line) trials for 90 

Valid -IC (left panel) and 90 Valid -CC (right panel) tasks across four categories of Easy -CS (first row), Difficult -CS (second row), 

Easy -IS (third row), and Difficul t-IS (last row). 

Behavioral performance during attentional reorienting is shown in Figure 6A . Median reaction times 

(top) and performance accuracies (bottom) are displayed for the two 90 % validity tasks ( 90 Valid –IC 

and 90 Valid –CC ), separately for easy and difficult trials and for congruent (CS) versus incongruent (IS) 

stimulus categories. Reaction times (RTs) were significantly slower and accuracies lower in invalid 

(Figure 6A) compared with valid trials (Figure 2A) for both 90 Valid tasks, confirming a strong cue -

invalidity effect ( 90 Valid –IC : RT z = 4.75, p < 0.0001; Accuracy z = –4.71, p < 0.0001; 90 Valid –CC : RT z 

= 4.73, p < 0.0001; Accuracy z = –4.77, p < 0.0001). The me di an RT increase between valid and invalid 

trials was 0.38 s in th e 90 Valid –IC task and 0.30 s in the 90 Valid –CC task, accompanied by accuracy 

drops of 7.6 % and 22 %, respectively. These observations thus confirm ed a strong cue invalidity effect. 

particularly for incongruent trials, suggesting increased demands on att entional monitoring and 

conflict resolution. In contrast, no reliable RT difference was observed between the two 90 Valid tasks 

for either valid (z = –0.37, p = 0.64) or invalid (z = –1.46, p = 0.93) trials, indicating comparable response 

latencies across cueing contexts. Accuracy, however, was significantly lower in the 90 Valid –CC task 

relative to the 90 Valid –IC task for invalid trials (z = –4.42, p < 0.0001 , Figure 6A ), while no difference 

emerged for valid trials (z = –0.62, p = 0.27). These results de monstrate that cue invalidity robustly 

impairs both speed and accuracy, and that the cost is especially pronounced in the 90 Valid –CC task, 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 24, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.23.684150 doi: bioRxiv preprint

22 

where monitoring the unattended side imposes higher demands on attentional control. Accuracy was 

higher for CS than IS trials in the 90 Valid -IC condition (p < 0.0001), suggesting that participants 

occasionally missed the cue on the unattended side but still responded correctly due to stimulus 

congruency . When taking into account target difficult and target/distractor c ongruency, t he ANOVA 

showed significant main effects of Task (F(1, 28) = 37.67, p = 1.09 × 10⁻⁶), Difficulty (F(1, 28) = 33.62, p 

= 2.77 × 10⁻⁶), and Congruency (F(1, 28) = 28.01, p = 1.13 × 10⁻⁵), along with Task × Difficulty (F(1, 28) 

= 9.46, p = 0.0045) and Task × Congruency (F(1, 28) = 67.70, p = 4.52 × 10⁻⁹) interactions. Follow -up 

Wilcoxon tests indicated no significant differences in RTs between easy and difficult conditions (all p > 

0.16). However, strong congruency effects emerged in the 90 Valid –CC task, where IS trials were slower 

than CS trials for both easy (p < 0.0001) and difficult (p = 0.0001) conditions. This probably reflects the 

fact that CS invalid trials aggregate both switch and non -switch trials . No congruency effects were 

found in the 90 Valid –IC task (all p > 0.46). 

Decoding performance during attentional reorienting is shown in Figure 6B. Given the behavioral 

evidence for slower and less accurate responses during invalid trials , particularly in the 90 Valid –CC 

task , we next as ked whether these performance costs reflect changes in the underlying neural 

representation of spatial attention. Specifically, we tested whether the attentional code established 

during valid trials remains stable or reorganize d when attention must be reor iented. To this end, trials 

were first divided into four categories according to task difficulty (easy or difficult) and stimulus 

congruency (CS or IS). For each category, a decoder was trained on valid trials only and subsequently 

tested on both valid and invalid trials of the same category. The resulting time -resolved decoding 

traces are displayed in Figure 6B , with gray lines indicating decoding performance for valid trials and 

black lines for invalid trials. Across most conditions, decoding accuracy was reliably lower for invalid 

than for valid trials, suggesting that attentional representations became less distinct when participants 

anticipated possible cue switches , likely reflecting the formation of probabilistic expectations about 

switch timing withi n each block. 

Having established that decoding performance decreased during invalid trials, we next asked whether 

this neural attenuation was behaviorally meaningful , that is, whether fluctuations in decoding strength 

predicted variability in reaction time s and accuracy across participants. We examined correlations 

between decoding differences and behavioral performance (reaction time and accuracy) across tasks 

and time windows as we did, in the previous section, for valid trials . For accuracy (difficult –IS ), task -

specific patterns emerged in line with cue position ( Figure 7A , corresponding analyses for CS trials are 

presented in supplementary Figure S 5). In the 90 Valid –IC task (cue on the attended side), positive 

trends appeared in the mid -latency (150 –250 ms, p = 0.0241) windows, consistent with the prediction 

that stronger decoding differences (weaker cue monitoring) lead to poorer accuracy. In contrast, in 

the 90 Valid –CC task (cue on the unattended side), a weak positive correlation in the early window (p 

= 0.0177) did not match the expected negative direction. None of the accuracy effects survived 

Bonferroni correction ( α = 0.0083). 

A positive relationship was predicted between ΔDecoding and ΔRT: when decoding differences were 

large (stronger bias toward the unattended side), participants were faster to respond once the target 

appeared on the opposite side, yielding smaller ΔRTs. Consistent with this hypothesis, significant 

positive correlations were found in the 90 Valid –IC task dur ing the mid -latency (150 –250 ms, p = 

0.0007) and late (350 –450 ms, p = 0.0001) windows, both surviving Bonferroni correction ( Figure 7B). 

No significant RT correlations were observed in the 90 Valid –CC task (all p ≥ 0.01). 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 24, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.23.684150 doi: bioRxiv preprint

23 

Together, these results indicate that neural decoding strength predicts behavioral performance in a 

task -specific manner: during valid trials, weaker attentional coding was associated with reduced 

accuracy, particularly in the 90 Valid –CC condition, whereas during invalid trials, stronge r attentional 

bias toward the unattended side predicted faster reorienting responses in the 90 Valid –IC condition.                 

> Figure 7.Correlation between decoding and behavioral differences across tasks for invalid trials. (A) Correlation between
> changes in decoding accuracy and behavioral performance (accuracy) across participants for the Difficult –IS condition. (B)
> Correlation between changes in decoding accuracy and reaction RT for the Easy –IS condition. For each partici pant, differences
> were computed relative to the 100 Valid task , using it as a reference for invalid trials from the 90 Valid -IC and 90 Valid -CC
> tasks. Correlations are shown for three temporal decoding windows ([ -125, −25], [150, 250], [350, 450] ms). Each dot
> represents one participant; solid lines denote least -squares linear fits. Pearson’s r,p-values, and sample sizes ( n) are reported
> within each panel. Participants with accuracy below 50% or RTs exceeding ±2 s.d. of the median in valid trials were excl uded
> from the respective analyses.

Rhythmic modulation of the attentional code in the alpha band 

The previous sections demonstrate that attentional decoding strength varies with task structure and 

behavioral performance . We next investigated whether these fluctuations exhibit rhythmic 

organization , an established hallmark of attentional sampling in both humans and nonhuman 

primates. To this end, we analyzed the spectral content of the DTT time series to determine whether 

the decoded attentional signal osci llated at characteristic frequencies. We used Superlet transform (3 –

40 Hz) and isolated periodic power components with FOOOF. For each subject and task, the logarithmic 

contrast between attention and control decoding signals (log[Att] − log[Ctrl]) was comp uted, and 

statistical significance of condition differences was assessed with a one -tailed cluster -based 

permutation test (Att > Ctrl, TFCE, 1,000 permutations). At the group level, all tasks exhibited a 

significant cluster in the alpha frequency range (~8 –12 Hz), indicating a reliable alpha -band modulation 

of attentional tracking before target onset ( Figure 8A ). To quantify this effect, we extracted median 

log -contrast power in the 10 –12 Hz range within the late pre -target window (−175 to −25 ms). These 

va lues were compared across tasks using a Friedman test, which revealed no significant overall 

difference ( χ²(2) = 1.87, p = 0.393). Post hoc Wilcoxon signed -rank tests with Bonferroni correction ( α

= 0.0167) showed a significant difference between the 90 Va lid –IC and 90 Valid –CC tasks (p = 0.0164), 

whereas the contrasts between 100 Valid and 90 Valid –IC (p = 0.6263) and between 100 Valid and 90 

Valid –CC (p = 0.0497) did not reach significant after correction. Together, these results reveal a robust 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 24, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.23.684150 doi: bioRxiv preprint

24 

alpha -band modulation of the attentional decoding signal preceding target onset, with subtle task -

dependent differences emerging between the two 90 Valid conditions. 

Our prediction was that alpha band power in the D TT trace should be highest in the 90 Valid tasks that 

involve switching, and more so in the 90 Valid -CC task that involves monitoring of both cued and 

uncued sides. The experimental observations were actually opposite to this prediction. Remarkably, 

when t his analysis was performed using the non -visual channels, significant alpha band DTT trace 

modulation was only observed for the 90 Valid CC tasks ( supplementary Figure 6 A). However, no clear 

statistical difference could be seen between the three tasks in the median log -contrast power in the 

10 –12 Hz range within the late pre -target window (−175 to −25 ms , supplementary Figure 6 B). When 

considering all channels, the DTT power in the alpha band was dominated by the pattern observed in 

when considering just th e visual channels though no statistically significant difference could be 

identified between the three tasks ( supplementary Figure 7).       

> Figure 8. Time -frequency representation (TFR) of DTT time series visual channels. (A) Left panel, Contrast TFR for the 100
> Valid task, showing significant clusters (with non -significant areas displayed with reduced transparency). Middle panel,
> Contrast TFR for the 90 Valid -IC task, with significant clusters. Right Panel, Contrast TFR for the 90 Valid -CC task, with
> signific ant clusters. (B) Median alpha power (10 –12 Hz) in the late pre -stimulus window ( –175 to –25 ms). Dots indicate
> individual subject medians, and solid lines within each half -violin show the median across subjects. * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01,
> *** p < 0.001 (Wil coxon rank -sum tests with Bonferroni correction for multiple comparisons).

## Discussion 

The present study establishes that covert spatial attention can be non -invasively decoded from human 

MEG recordings with millisecond precision. Using linear classifiers applied to sensor -level signals, we 

could reconstruct, on a single -trial basis, the spatial locus of attention throughout the pre -target 

interval. This demonstrates that the la rge -scale neural dynamics captured by MEG contain sufficient 

information to track the moment -to -moment deployment of attention, extending prior EEG and MEG 

decoding studies (Bae and Luck, 2018; Foster et al., 2017; Samaha et al., 2016; Wyart et al., 2015) by 

showing that attentional spatial orientation information can be recovered robustly even when task 

contingencies vary. Decoding accuracy systematically decreased with decreased cue reliability, 

confirming that the strength and spatial precision of attentional engagement depend on predictive 

context. The Distance -to -Truth analysis further revealed that attentional fo cus sharpened as target 

onset approached, but that this pre -target alignment weakened when cue validity was reduced, 

indicating more diffuse or exploratory allocation of attention under uncertainty. Task -related 

differences in decoding strength were mirror ed by behavioral performance: stronger attentional 

decoding across tasks predicted higher differences in accuracy and responses, establishing a tight link 

between neural coding of attention and behavioral efficiency. Finally, spectral analysis of the decod ing 

trajectories uncovered rhythmic fluctuations in the alpha band (~8 –12 Hz) across all task variants, 

demonstrating that attention samples space rhythmically even when task structure was highly 

predictive . Together, these findings validate the feasibilit y of MEG -based decoding of attention and 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 24, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.23.684150 doi: bioRxiv preprint

25 

provide a methodological bridge between invasive primate electrophysiology and human whole -brain 

recordings. 

Sensor -space versus source -space decoding 

While our main analyses focused on sensor -level MEG signals, this choice was guided by both 

methodological and conceptual considerations. Decoding from sensors provides a direct, high -

temporal -resolution readout of distributed neural dynamics without requi ring model -based inverse 

solutions, thereby minimizing assumptions about source geometry and spatial priors (Grootswagers et 

al., 2017; King and Dehaene, 2014) . Restricting analyses to visual sensors allowed us to isolate the 

sensory components most strongly modulated by covert attention, in line with canonical findings of 

alpha -band lateralization over occi pito -parietal areas (Thut et al., 2006; Worden et al., 2000) . Decoding 

acc uracies were degraded when considering only non -visual sensors. Combining non -visual and visual 

sensors did not significantly improve overall decoding accuracies relative to using just visual sensors 

suggesting that most of the attention -related informatio n is captured by these latter sensors. 

However, spatial attention arises from coordinated interactions within a large -scale fronto -parietal 

network (Corbetta and Shulman, 2002; Kastner et Ungerleider, 2000) , and sensor -space decoding 

cannot disentangle the relative contributions of these distributed sources. Moving to source -localized 

decoding thus constitutes a critical next step. Source reconstruction methods, such as beamforming 

or minimum -norm estimation , can project sensor signals into anatomically constrained cortical space, 

allowing more direct mapping between decoding performance and the underlying neural generators 

(Cichy et al., 2014; Jaiswal et al., 2020; Konttila et al., 2014) . Several recent studies have demonstrated 

that source -space decoding enhances spatial specificity and improves interpretability of attentional 

dynamics by revealing localized alpha generators in occipital and parietal cortices as well as task -

dependent modulations in pre frontal areas (Foster et al., 2017) . Integrating such source -resolved 

decoding with the trajectory -based approach used here would bridge population -level dynamics to 

anatomically grounded mechanisms, ultimately linking rhythmic attentional sampling to the 

coordinate d activity of specific cortical subnetworks. 

Task -dependent modulation of the decoded attentional code 

Extending prior work, we show for the first time that attentional decoding from MEG generalizes across 

tasks that manipulate cue validity, revealing that task structure —specifically, cue reliability and 

switching rules —systematically modulates both the strength and spatial distribution of attention. A 

growing body of studies has highlighted that attentional control signals are highly dynamic in both 

space and time (Fiebelkorn et al., 2018, 2013; Hamed, 2025; Landau et al., 2015; Landau and Fries, 

2012) . Our previous invasive research in macaques established real -time decoding of the two -

dimensional locus of covert attention (Astrand et al., 2016, 2020) and revealed its rhythmic (Gaillard 

et al., 2020) and state -dependent dynamics (Amengual et al., 2022) . These invasive studies 

demonstrated how prefrontal networks flexibly implement proactive and reactive mechanisms of 

visual suppression (Di Bello et al., 2022) and how these mechanisms adapt to both within -trial 

contingences, varying between pre -cue and post -cue epoch s, (Gaillard et al., 2020) as well as to across 

task contingencies, varying as a function of task structure  (Gaillard et al., 2020; Mouille et al., 2025) .

The pre sent findings extend these principles to non -invasive human MEG, providing direct evidence 

that dynamic attentional codes can be measured at the whole -brain level from different tasks . We 

additionally show that both trial structure (time from target onset) and task structure (cue reliability 

and switching rules ), systematically modulates attention decoding accuracy. The task -related 

differences in decoding performance provide the first line of evidence that the MEG -derived 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 24, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.23.684150 doi: bioRxiv preprint

26 

attentional code reflects behavior ally meaningful neural dynamics rather than generic signal variance. 

Decoding accuracy systematically decreased as cue validity was reduced, mirroring the decline in 

behavioral performance under uncertainty. This graded modulation indicates that the streng th and 

spatial precision of the decoded signal scale with the reliability of top -down predictions about target 

location. In the 100 Valid task, participants could rely on stable expectations, resulting in highly focused 

pre -target attention and stronger cl assifier separability between left - and right -attended trials. In 

contrast, the 90 Valid tasks required maintaining flexible attentional sets and greater monitoring of 

unattended locations, producing more variable and spatially diffuse decoding traces. Und er reduced 

cue reliability, this temporal gain was attenuated, indicating that uncertainty not only broadens the 

spatial distribution of attention but also dampens its temporal precision. This correspondence 

between decoding accuracy and behavioral efficie ncy aligns with reports that neural discriminability 

of attentional states predicts perceptual precision and decision speed (Bae and Luck, 2018; Foster et 

al., 2017; Wyart et al., 2015) . Likewise, in all tasks, attention decoding accuracy was higher close to 

target presentation than earlier on in the trial, reflecting the progressive focusing of the attentional 

spotlight as temporal expectations build up. This temporal sharpening of decodi ng mirrors the 

anticipatory enhancement of perceptual sensitivity observed in behavioral and electrophysiological 

studies of attention (Nobre and van Ede, 2018; Rohenkohl and Nobre, 2011) , and suggests that the 

decoded MEG signal captures both the spatial and temporal dynamics of top -down preparatory 

control. Together, these results establish that the MEG decoding signal captures task -dependent 

fluctuations in attentional engagement and thus constitutes a behaviorally relevant neural marke r of 

attention. 

Single -trial tracking and direct neural –behavioral coupling 

Beyond mean decoding accuracy, the Distance -to -Truth (DTT) metric and single -trial temporal 

trajectories provide a more sensitive, second line of evidence linking the decoded atten tional signal to 

behavioral performance. DTT analyses revealed that attention progressively converged toward the 

cued target as stimulus onset approached, but that this pre -target sharpening weakened when cue 

reliability decreased —indicating a shift from p roactive, focused orienting to a more exploratory 

sampling mode under uncertainty. Importantly, the magnitude of these task -related differences in 

attentional dynamics across participants predicted corresponding differences in behavioral 

performance: subje cts who showed stronger differences in the spatial distribution of decoded 

attentional traces between tasks also exhibited greater behavioral variations in accuracy and reaction 

time. These neural –behavioral correlations demonstrate that trial -by -trial flu ctuations in decoding 

strength directly translate into perceptual outcomes, supporting the notion that the decoded 

trajectories capture genuine attentional deployment rather than classifier noise. Such single -trial 

coupling between attention decoding and p erformance parallels intracranial observations in macaques 

showing that momentary deviations of the decoded attentional spotlight predict behavioral lapses 

(Amengual et al., 2022; Gaillard et al., 2021) as well as uncontrolled responses to task -irrelevant events 

(Astrand et al., 2016, 2020; Di Bello et al., 2022; Gaillard et al., 2020) . All this taken together reinforces 

the functional validity of MEG -based attention tracking and underscores its potential for real -time 

applications such as neurofeedback or adaptive brain –computer interfaces. 

Rhythmic organization of att entional traces 

The spectral decomposition of the decoding -derived attention trajectories provides converging 

evidence that spatial attention operates rhythmically in the human brain. Across all task variants, we 

identified robust oscillatory components wi thin the alpha band (~8 –12 Hz), consistent with the notion 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 24, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.23.684150 doi: bioRxiv preprint

27 

that attention samples space through rhythmic cycles of enhancement and suppression (Fiebelkorn 

and Kastner, 2019; Gaillard et al., 2020; Landau and Fries, 2012; VanRullen, 2016) . This rhythmic 

modulation of the decoded signal demonstrates that the neural code underlying the spatial 

deployment of attention is intrinsically oscillatory, even when task contingencies vary , as already 

reported intracortically by (Gaillard et al., 2020) . The persistence of this alpha rhythmicity across tasks 

indicates that rhythmic sampling represents a core temporal organizing principle of attentional 

co ntrol, robust to changes in cue reliability and switching rules. Yet, the relative amplitude of these 

oscillations differed across tasks, suggesting that the strength of rhythmic modulation is flexibly tuned 

by top -down demands. Contrary to our initial pre diction of stronger alpha power in the 90 Valid -CC 

condition —where continuous monitoring of the unattended side was required —alpha rhythmicity 

peaked in the 90 Valid -IC task, possibly reflecting stronger endogenous control to maintain and update 

attentiona l focus when unexpected cue reversals occurred in the attended hemifield. This pattern 

aligns with proposals that alpha oscillations index top -down inhibitory gating and flexible re -allocation 

of resources (Bonnefond and Jensen, 2025; Jensen, 2024; Jensen an d Mazaheri, 2010; Klimesch, 2012) .

Importantly, these findings demonstrate that the rhythmic structure of the decoded MEG traces 

captures a fundamental aspect of attentional dynamics previously observed in invasive primate 

recordings (Gaillard et al., 2020) and human behavioral performance (Fiebelkorn et al., 2018; Landau 

et al., 2015 ).

Importantly, because alpha power distributions depend ed strongly on sensor selection , the observed 

rhythmic content may partly reflect the geometry and sensitivity profile of the occipito -parietal sensors 

most responsive to alpha -band fluctuations. This raises the critical question of whether the rhythmic 

dynamics identified here originate from localized cortical generators or from distributed large -scale 

coupling between parietal and frontal regions. Addressing this will require reconstructing atten tion -

decoding trajectories at the source level, where oscillatory content can be mapped onto anatomically 

and functionally defined regions. Investigating rhythmic decoding from source -localized activity will be 

essential to establish a direct link between the temporal structure of MEG -decoded attention and the 

oscillatory control mechanisms that coordinate the fronto -parietal attention network (Corbetta and 

Shulman, 2002; Fiebelkorn and Kastner, 2019) . By integrating temporal decoding and spatial source 

reconstruction, future work can determine how distinct cortical nodes contribute to the rhythmic 

sampling of space, thereby bridging non -invasive attention decoding with mechanistic models of 

oscillatory network control. 

Overall, these findings demonstrate that MEG can capture dynamic, task -dependent fluctuations in 

spatial attention that parallel those observed in non -human pr imates. The results reveal that the 

structure of attentional demands reshapes the neural code for attention, modulates rhythmic 

sampling, and influences behavioral efficiency. By bridging invasive primate and non -invasive human 

research, this study provide s a mechanistic link between cortical attentional control and behavior, and 

establishes MEG decoding of attention as a promising tool for mechanistic and clinical applications, 

including neurofeedback and attention -related interventions. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 24, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.23.684150 doi: bioRxiv preprint

28 

## References 

Amengual, J.L., Di Bello, F., Ben Hadj Hassen, S., Ben Hamed, S., 2022a. Distractibility and impulsivity 

neural states are distinct from selective attention and modulate the implemen tation of spatial 

attention. Nat Commun 13, 4796. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467 -022 -32385 -y

Amengual, J.L., Di Bello, F., Ben Hadj Hassen, S., Ben Hamed, S., 2022b. Distractibility and impulsivity 

neural states are distinct from selective attention and mo dulate the implementation of spatial 

attention. Nat Commun 13, 4796. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467 -022 -32385 -y

Astrand, E., Wardak, C., Baraduc, P., Ben Hamed, S., 2016. Direct Two -Dimensional Access to the 

Spatial Location of Covert Attention in Macaque Prefrontal Cortex. Current Biology 26, 1699 –

1704. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2016.04.054 

Astrand, E., Wardak, C., Ben Hamed, S., 2020. Neuronal population correlates of target selection and 

distractor filtering. NeuroImage 209, 116517. 

https://doi.org/1 0.1016/j.neuroimage.2020.116517 

Bae, G. -Y., Luck, S.J., 2018. Dissociable Decoding of Spatial Attention and Working Memory from EEG 

Oscillations and Sustained Potentials.  J. Neurosci. 38, 409 –422. 

https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2860 -17.2017 

Bonnefond, M ., Jensen, O., 2025.  The role of alpha oscillations in resisting distraction. Trends in 

Cognitive Sciences 29, 368 –379. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2024.11.004 

Cichy, R.M., Pantazis, D., Oliva, A., 2014. Resolving human object recognition in space and t ime. Nat 

Neurosci 17, 455 –462. https://doi.org/10.1038/nn.3635 

Corbetta, M., Shulman, G.L., 2002a. Control of goal -directed and stimulus -driven attention in the brain. 

Nat Rev Neurosci 3, 201 –215. https://doi.org/10.1038/nrn755 

Corbetta, M., Shulman, G.L., 2002b. Control of goal -directed and stimulus -driven attention in the brain. 

Nat Rev Neurosci 3, 201 –215. https://doi.org/10.1038/nrn755 

Crouzet, S.M., VanRullen, R., 2017. The rhythm of attentional stimulus selection during visual 

competitio n (preprint). Neuroscience. https://doi.org/10.1101/105239 

De Sousa, C., Gaillard, C., Di Bello, F., Ben Hadj Hassen, S., Ben Hamed, S., 2021. Behavioral validation 

of novel high resolution attention decoding method from multi -units & local field potential s. 

NeuroImage 231, 117853. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2021.117853 

Di Bello, F., Ben Hadj Hassen, S., Astrand, E., Ben Hamed, S., 2022a. Prefrontal Control of Proactive and 

Reactive Mechanisms of Visual Suppression. Cerebral Cortex 32, 2745 –2761. 

https://doi.org/10.1093/cercor/bhab378 

Di Bello, F., Ben Hadj Hassen, S., Astrand, E., Ben Hamed, S., 2022b. Prefrontal Control of Proactive and 

Reactive Mechanisms of Visual Suppression. Cerebral Cortex 32, 2745 –2761. 

https://doi.org/10.1093/cercor/bhab37 8

Donoghue, T., Haller, M., Peterson, E.J., Varma, P., Sebastian, P., Gao, R., Noto, T., Lara, A.H., Wallis, 

J.D., Knight, R.T., Shestyuk, A., Voytek, B., 2020. Parameterizing neural power spectra into 

periodic and aperiodic components. Nature Neuroscience 23, 1655 –1665. 

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41593 -020 -00744 -x

Fiebelkorn, I.C., Kastner, S., 2019a. A Rhythmic Theory of Attention. Trends in Cognitive Sciences 23, 

87 –101. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2018.11.009 

Fiebelkorn, I.C., Kastner, S., 2019b. A Rhy thmic Theory of Attention. Trends in Cognitive Sciences 23, 

87 –101. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2018.11.009 

Fiebelkorn, I.C., Pinsk, M.A., Kastner, S., 2018. A Dynamic Interplay within the Frontoparietal Network 

Underlies Rhythmic Spatial Attention. Neu ron 99, 842 -853.e8. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2018.07.038 

Fiebelkorn, I.C., Saalmann, Y.B., Kastner, S., 2013. Rhythmic Sampling within and between Objects 

despite Sustained Attention at a Cued Location. Current Biology 23, 2553 –2558. 

https://doi.or g/10.1016/j.cub.2013.10.063 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 24, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.23.684150 doi: bioRxiv preprint

29 

Foster, J.J., Sutterer, D.W., Serences, J.T., Vogel, E.K., Awh, E., 2017. Alpha -Band Oscillations Enable 

Spatially and Temporally Resolved Tracking of Covert Spatial Attention. Psychol Sci 28, 929 –

941. https://doi.org/10.1177/09 56797617699167 

Gaillard, C., Ben Hadj Hassen, S., Di Bello, F., Bihan -Poudec, Y., VanRullen, R., Ben Hamed, S., 2020a. 

Prefrontal attentional saccades explore space rhythmically. Nat Commun 11, 925. 

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467 -020 -14649 -7

Gaillard, C., Ben Hadj Hassen, S., Di Bello, F., Bihan -Poudec, Y., VanRullen, R., Ben Hamed, S., 2020b. 

Prefrontal attentional saccades explore space rhythmically. Nat Commun 11, 925. 

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467 -020 -14649 -7

Gaillard, C., Ben Hamed, S., 2022. The neur al bases of spatial attention and perceptual rhythms. Eur J 

of Neuroscience 55, 3209 –3223. https://doi.org/10.1111/ejn.15044 

Gaillard, C., Sousa, C.D., Amengual, J., Loriette, C., Ziane, C., Hassen, S.B.H., Bello, F.D., Hamed, S.B., 

2021. Attentional brain rhythms during prolonged cognitive activity. 

https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.05.26.445730 

Grootswagers, T., Wardle, S.G., Carlson, T.A., 2017. Decoding Dynamic Brain Patterns from Evoked 

Responses: A Tutorial on Multivariate Pattern Analysis Applied to Time Series Neuroimaging 

Data.  J Cogn Neurosci 29, 677 –697. https://doi.org/10.1162/jocn_a_01068 

Hamed, S.B., 2025.  Decoding Covert Visual Attention in Space and Time from Neural Signals. Annual 

Review of Vision Science 11, 495 –520. https://doi.org/10.1146/annu rev -vision -101322 -

011902 

Holcombe, A.O., Chen, W. -Y., 2013. Splitting attention reduces temporal resolution from 7 Hz for 

tracking one object to <3 Hz when tracking three. Journal of Vision 13, 12 –12. 

https://doi.org/10.1167/13.1.12 

Jaiswal, A., Nenonen, J ., Stenroos, M., Gramfort, A., Dalal, S.S., Westner, B.U., Litvak, V., Mosher, J.C., 

Schoffelen, J. -M., Witton, C., Oostenveld, R., Parkkonen, L., 2020. Comparison of beamformer 

implementations for MEG source localization. NeuroImage 216, 116797. 

https://d oi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2020.116797 

Jensen, O., 2024. Distractor inhibition by alpha oscillations is controlled by an indirect mechanism 

governed by goal -relevant information.  Commun Psychol 2, 36. 

https://doi.org/10.1038/s44271 -024 -00081 -w

Jensen, O., Mazaheri, A., 2010.  Shaping Functional Architecture by Oscillatory Alpha Activity: Gating by 

Inhibition. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 4. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2010.00186 

Kienitz, R., Schmiedt, J.T., Shapcott, K.A., Kouroupaki, K., Saunders, R.C., Schmid, M.C., 2018. Theta 

Rhythmic Neuronal Activity and Reaction Times Arising from Cortical Receptive Field 

Interactions during Distributed Attention. Current Biology 28, 2377 -2387.e5. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2018.05.086 

King, J. -R., Dehaene, S., 2014. Ch aracterizing the dynamics of mental representations: the temporal 

generalization method. Trends in Cognitive Sciences 18, 203 –210. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2014.01.002 

Klimesch, W., 2012. Alpha -band oscillations, attention, and controlled access to s tored information. 

Trends in Cognitive Sciences 16, 606 –617. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2012.10.007 

Konttila, T., Mäntynen, V., Stenroos, M., 2014. Comparison of minimum -norm estimation and 

beamforming in electrocardiography with acute ischemia. Physio l. Meas. 35, 623. 

https://doi.org/10.1088/0967 -3334/35/4/623 

Landau, A.N., Fries, P., 2012. Attention Samples Stimuli Rhythmically. Current Biology 22, 1000 –1004. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2012.03.054 

Landau, A.N., Schreyer, H.M., van Pelt, S., Fries, P., 2015. Distributed Attention Is Implemented through 

Theta -Rhythmic Gamma Modulation. Current Biology 25, 2332 –2337. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2015.07.048 

Maris, E., Oostenveld, R., 2007. Nonparametric statistical testing of EEG - and MEG -data. Journa l of 

Neuroscience Methods 164, 177 –190. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jneumeth.2007.03.024 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 24, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.23.684150 doi: bioRxiv preprint

30 

Michel, R., Dugué, L., Busch, N.A., 2020. Perceptual rhythms are driven by oscillations in visual 

precision. Journal of Vision 20, 1164. https://doi.org/10.1167/jov.20.1 1.1164 

Moca, V.V., Bârzan, H., Nagy -Dăbâcan, A., Mureșan, R.C., 2021. Time -frequency super -resolution with 

superlets. Nat Commun 12, 337. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467 -020 -20539 -9

Mouille, A., Gaillard, C., Astrand, E., Wardak, C., Amengual, J.L., Hamed, S.B., 2025. The prefrontal 

cortex encodes task -identity information and flexibly adjusts its sensory processes as a 

function of the specific ongoing task. PLOS Biology 23, e3003353. 

https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.3003353 

Nobre, A.C., van Ede, F., 2018. Anticipated moments: temporal structure in attention.  Nat Rev Neurosci 

19, 34 –48. https://doi.org/10.1038/nrn.2017.141 

Rohenkohl, G., Nobre, A.C., 2011.  Alpha Oscillations Related to Anticipatory Attention Follow Temporal 

Expectations. J. Neurosc i. 31, 14076 –14084. https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3387 -

11.2011 

Samaha, J., Sprague, T.C., Postle, B.R., 2016. Decoding and Reconstructing the Focus of Spatial 

Attention from the Topography of Alpha -band Oscillations. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 

28, 1090 –1097. https://doi.org/10.1162/jocn_a_00955 

Spyropoulos, G., Bosman, C.A., Fries, P., 2018. A theta rhythm in macaque visual cortex and its 

attentional modulation. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 115. 

https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1719433115 

Thaler, L. , Schütz, A.C., Goodale, M.A., Gegenfurtner, K.R., 2013. What is the best fixation target? The 

effect of target shape on stability of fixational eye movements. Vision Research 76, 31 –42. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.visres.2012.10.012 

Thut, G., Nietzel, A., B randt, S.A., Pascual -Leone, A., 2006. α -Band Electroencephalographic Activity 

over Occipital Cortex Indexes Visuospatial Attention Bias and Predicts Visual Target Detection. 

J. Neurosci. 26, 9494 –9502. https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0875 -06.2006 

Ungerle ider, S.K.A.L.G., 2000.  Mechanisms of Visual Attention in the Human Cortex.  Annu. Rev. 

Neurosci. 23, 315 –341. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.neuro.23.1.315 

VanRullen, R., 2018. Attention Cycles. Neuron 99, 632 –634. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2018.08 .006 

VanRullen, R., 2016. Perceptual Cycles. Trends in Cognitive Sciences 20, 723 –735. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2016.07.006 

VanRullen, R., 2013. Visual Attention: A Rhythmic Process? Current Biology 23, R1110 –R1112. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2013 .11.006 

Worden, M.S., Foxe, J.J., Wang, N., Simpson, G.V., 2000. Anticipatory Biasing of Visuospatial Attention 

Indexed by Retinotopically Specific α -Bank Electroencephalography Increases over Occipital 

Cortex. J. Neurosci. 20, RC63 –RC63. https://doi.org/1 0.1523/JNEUROSCI.20 -06 -j0002.2000 

Wyart, V., Myers, N.E., Summerfield, C., 2015. Neural Mechanisms of Human Perceptual Choice Under 

Focused and Divided Attention. J. Neurosci. 35, 3485 –3498. 

https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3276 -14.2015 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 24, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.23.684150 doi: bioRxiv preprint

31 

## Supplementary Figures 

Figure S1. Pre -target alpha‐band lateralization across tasks. Each row corresponds to one of the three tasks (100 Valid, 90 

Valid -IC, 90 Valid -CC). Columns show: (A) Time –frequency representation of the Left – Right trial contrast, averaged ove r left‐ 

hemisphere visual channels. (B) The same Left – Right contrast, averaged over right‐hemisphere visual channels. (C) Scalp 

topography marking the channels that exhibit significant alpha‐band lateralization in the pre -target interval ( –100 to 0 ms; 

11 –13 Hz). 

.CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 24, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.23.684150 doi: bioRxiv preprint 32 

.CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 24, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.23.684150 doi: bioRxiv preprint 33 

.CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 24, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.23.684150 doi: bioRxiv preprint 34 

Figure S2. Time -resolved decoding of all subjects for visual channels. All else as in Figure 2C. 

Figure S3. Time -resolved decoding of non -visual channels (top panel) and all channels (bottom panel) group -level results. 

(A) 100 Valid task (B) 90 Valid -IC task. (C) 90 Valid -CC task. 

Figure S4. Correlation between decoding and behavioral differences across tasks. 

(A) Top panel. Correlation between changes in decoding accuracy and behavioral performance (accuracy) across par ticipants 

for the Difficult –CS condition for valid trials. Bottom panel. Correlation between changes in decoding accuracy and behavioral 

performance (accuracy) across participants for the Difficult –CS condition for invalid trials. 

(B) Top panel. Correlatio n between changes in decoding accuracy and reaction RT for the Easy –CS condition for valid trials. 

Bottom panel. Correlation between changes in decoding accuracy and reaction RT for the Easy –CS condition for invalid trials. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 24, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.23.684150 doi: bioRxiv preprint

35 

For each participant, difference s were computed relative to the 100 Valid task , using it as a reference for valid and invalid 

trials from the 90 Valid -IC and 90 Valid -CC tasks. Correlations are shown for three temporal decoding windows ([ -125, −25], 

[150, 250], [350, 450] ms). Each dot r epresents one participant; solid lines denote least -squares linear fits. Pearson’s r, p-

values, and sample sizes ( n) are reported within each panel. Participants with accuracy below 50% or RTs exceeding ±2 s.d. 

of the median in valid trials were excluded from the respective analyses. 

Figure S5. Correlation traces between decoding and behavioral differences across tasks for Valid and Invalid trials. 

(A) Valid trials. Top panels : Correlation traces in red color between changes in decoding accura cy and behavioral 

performance (accuracy) across participants for the Difficult –IS condition for 90 Valid -IC and 90 Valid -CC tasks with showing 

decoding trace for 100 Valid in gray color as reference and 90 Valid -IC decoding trace in dark blue (left_panel) and light blue 

for 90 Valid -CC (right panel). Bottom panel: Same as top panel, but the correlation traces are between changes in decoding 

accuracy and RT across participants for the Easy –IS condition. 

(B) Invalid trials. Top panel and bottom panel are the same as (A), but for invalid trials. 

For each participant, differences were computed relative to the 100 Valid task, using it as a reference for valid and invalid 

trials in the 90 Valid -IC and 90 Valid -CC tasks. Each time point in the correlation trace re presents the correlation of 100 ms 

sliding -window decoding accuracy values with behavioral differences across participants. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 24, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.10.23.684150 doi: bioRxiv preprint

36 

Figure S 6. Time -frequency representation (TFR) of DTT time series non -visual channels. (A) Left panel , Contrast TFR for 

the 100 Valid task, showing significant clusters (with non -significant areas displayed with reduced transparency). Middle 

panel, Contrast TFR for the 90 Valid -IC task, with significant clusters. Right Panel, Contrast TFR for the 90 Valid -CC task, with 

significant clusters. 

Figure S 7. Time -frequency representation (TFR) of DTT time series all channels. (A) Left panel , Contrast TFR for the 100 Valid 

task, showing significant clusters (with non -significant areas displayed with reduced transparency). Middle panel, Contrast 

TFR for the 90 Valid -IC task, with significant clusters. Right Panel, Contrast TFR for the 90 Valid -CC task, with significant 

clusters.