CRITICS - Critical Science Without Borders: Language
Models to Promote Critical Thinking in Science Education
Rodrigo Agerri1,*, Itziar Aldabe1, Elena Cabrio2, Mark Cieliebak3, Jan Deriu3,
Mariana Flores1, Jurgita Kapoči¯uṫe-Dzikieṅe4, Dovil̇e Kuizinieṅe4, Arantza Rico5,
Aritz Ruiz-González5, Aitor Soroa1, Mantas Vaškevičius4 and Serena Villata2
1HiTZ Center - Ixa, University of the Basque Country EHU
2Université Côte d’Azur, Inria, CNRS, I3S, France
3Centre for Artificial Intelligence, ZHAW School of Engineering
4Faculty of Informatics, Vytautas Magnus University, Lithuania
5Department of Mathematics, Experimental and Social Sciences Education, University of the Basque Country EHU
Abstract
The CRITICS project addresses science accessibility and literacy through the convergence of advanced Machine
Translation (MT) based on Large Language Models (LLMs) and educational technology. By leveraging MT
systems specifically optimized for scientific content, educational institutions can provide accurate, culturally
relevant translations of scientific materials in students’ native languages, ensuring that complex scientific
concepts are comprehensible while maintaining technical accuracy. Building on these translations, the project
explores the design and evaluation of innovative science teaching–learning proposals grounded in curriculum-
aligned teaching–learning. Thus, CRITICS will investigate key components of scientific argumentation and
critical thinking practices together with textual feedback aligned with learning objectives and assessment criteria
inspired by competence-based evaluation frameworks. CRITICS aims to break down language barriers in accessing
cutting-edge research and educational materials currently only available in high-resourced languages, thereby
facilitating the democratization of scientific knowledge while fostering critical thinking in science education.
Keywords
Science Education, Scientific Terminology, Argumentation, Machine Translation, Natural Language Processing
1. Introduction
CRITICS1 is a three-year CHIST-ERA IV Cofund 2025 project funded within the topic “Science in your
own language”.2 This call addresses the translation of scientific knowledge to bridge linguistic and
cultural gaps for those who must disseminate and access scientific knowledge beyond their linguistic
scope.
The project is coordinated by the HiTZ Center from the University of the Basque Country EHU, funded
by MICIU/AEI /10.13039/501100011033 and by the European Union (PCI2025-167239-2). In addition
to HiTZ, the EHU team includes researchers from the Department of Mathematics, Experimental and
Social Sciences Education. The consortium is also formed by the CNRS/Université Côte d’Azur in France
(grant no ANR-25-CHR4-0002-02), Vytautas Magnus University (VMU) (funded by the Research Council
of Lithuania, agreement No. S-CHIST-ERA-26-1), and the ZHAW Center for Artificial Intelligence in
Switzerland (grant no. 20CH-1_238349).
SEPLN 2026: 42nd International Conference of the Spanish Society for Natural Language Processing, León, Spain, 22-25 September
2026.
*Corresponding author.
$ rodrigo.agerri@ehu.eus (R. Agerri); itziar.aldabe@ehu.eus (I. Aldabe); elena.cabrio@univ-cotedazur.fr (E. Cabrio);
mark.cieliebak@zhaw.ch (M. Cieliebak); janmilan.deriu@zhaw.ch (J. Deriu); mariana.flores@ehu.eus (M. Flores);
jurgita.kapociute-dzikiene@vdu.lt (J. Kapoči¯uṫe-Dzikieṅe); dovile.kuiziniene@vdu.lt (D. Kuizinieṅe); arantza.rico@ehu.eus
(A. Rico); aritz.ruiz@ehu.eus (A. Ruiz-González); a.soroa@ehu.eus (A. Soroa); mantas.vaskevicius@vdu.lt (M. Vaškevičius);
serena.villata@univ-cotedazur.fr (S. Villata)
© 2026 Copyright for this paper by its authors. Use permitted under Creative Commons License Attribution 4.0 International (CC BY 4.0).
1https://www.hitz.eus/critics
2https://www.chistera.eu/projects-call-2025


Figure 1: Three main components in the CRITICS approach.
Scientific literacy and the development of critical thinking are essential components for a democratic
society. However, access to scientific knowledge continues to be conditioned by language, since a large
proportion of research articles and advanced educational resources are published almost exclusively in
English or other high-resource languages such as Spanish. This situation creates linguistic inequality
that limits learning opportunities for both students and teachers of science, particularly in low-resource
languages such as Basque, and hinders students’ ability to learn how to construct evidence-based argu-
ments in their own language. The CRITICS project addresses these challenges through the convergence
of advanced MT systems based on language models (LLMs) and educational technologies.
The accessibility to scientific content in our own languages through advanced MT naturally connects
to the automated generation of science education materials, where LLMs can be applied to synthesize
and adapt complex scientific concepts into level-appropriate and pedagogically sound resources. Thus,
CRITICS will develop and adapt LLMs to facilitate the generation of customized science education
materials [1].
CRITICS will mostly follow recent science education research focused on Design-Based Research
[2] and consider education materials to specify the driving problem/questions, the learning objectives
focused on competency acquisition, the scientific practices including scientific argumentation and
critical thinking, and the activities to be made by the science students. The availability of machine-
translated scientific knowledge will be crucial to investigating and developing LLMs for the automatic
generation of appropriate education materials in the students’ native languages that relate to local
students’ experiences [2].
Overall Approach: Figure 1 illustrates the integrated approach provided by CRITICS, which directly
addresses the core objectives of the call by creating a comprehensive ecosystem that not only machine
translates scientific content but transforms it into educationally meaningful resources with built-in
assessment capabilities. CRITICS will develop a three-component system as in Figure 1 for cross-
lingual scientific knowledge transfer. The first component is an LLM-based scientific document
translation system that surpasses conventional MT approaches, which often struggle with domain-
specific terminology and notation [3, 4], using adapters fine-tuned on specialized scientific corpora


to preserve structural elements and field-specific terminology. The second component, a Teaching
and Learning Sequence (TLS) generator, will investigate how to transform translated scientific
literature into structured educational resources by analyzing the corpus to identify key concepts and
pedagogical approaches, extracting argumentation graphs to generate TLSs. The third component,
an LLM-based automatic assessor, will focus on how to evaluate student responses to TLS-derived
activities by analyzing evidence-based argumentation and applying automatically generated scientific
critical questions, with Argument Mining capabilities to detect misconceptions and fallacies. The
CRITICS LLMs adapted to the tasks will be placed in a continuous improvement loop where assessments
feed back into translation quality, teaching resource development, and assessment criteria refinement.
2. Related Work and Novelty
CRITICS will comply with TRL 5 – technology validated in relevant environments (industrially relevant
environment in the case of key enabling technologies),3 where the qualitative evaluation will be done
involving domain-experts (science education teachers and researchers on the two main disciplines
targeted in the project, natural science and AI) in both the supervision and the actual evaluation.
2.1. LLM-based MT of Scientific Documents
LLMs have substantially advanced the field of MT, particularly for high-resource languages and
general-purpose domains. Proprietary models deliver strong fluency and document-level coherence,
benefiting from long-context modeling and multilingual pretraining, though notable gaps remain in
low-resource scenarios [5, 6]. Prompt-based strategies (especially zero- and few-shot prompting) have
emerged as effective methods for improving LLM translation performance [7]. Terminology-aware
prompting and term injection have received growing attention as key techniques for addressing a
persistent challenge in domain-specific MT: terminological inconsistency. This is especially critical
in scholarly translation, where inaccurate terminology can distort meaning or undermine academic
precision [3]. Recent work highlights diverse strategies for integrating terminology into LLM-based
MT [8, 9, 4]. Despite these advances, less-resourced languages have received limited attention in
LLM-based MT research. Recent work [10] demonstrates promising results for English–Lithuanian
translation using open-weight LLMs. However, these findings are based on benchmark data rather than
real scholarly texts, thus highlighting the need for more work in domain-specific, low-resource scenarios.
Progress beyond the state-of-the-art: This project builds on recent advances in LLM-based MT but
goes further by addressing the core challenges of scholarly translation (particularly for low-resource
languages such as Lithuanian and Basque, with French included for comparative purposes). Our focus
extends beyond fluency and general translation quality to include terminological precision, structural
accuracy, and document-level coherence – i.e., key requirements in scholarly texts. We will benchmark a
range of available LLMs, prioritizing open-weight models with good performance on the target languages
such as Gemma [11], Llama [12] or language-specific models such as Latxa [13], to identify the most
effective options for our target language pairs: English–Lithuanian, English–Basque, English–French
and English-German. A central focus of the project is document-level translation, where maintaining
consistency of terminology and coherence across sections is essential. To support this, we will develop
domain-specific terminology glossaries. These glossaries will be integrated into the translation workflow
through prompt engineering or as part of the fine-tuning datasets. Beyond linguistic accuracy, we
will also develop tools to preserve the layout and structure of scholarly documents, ensuring that
translations retain citations, equations, code, and section formatting.
3https://horizoneuropencpportal.eu/sites/default/files/2022-12/trl-assessment-tool-guide-final.pdf


2.2. Argument(ation) Mining (AM)
Existing research on mining, assessing, reasoning over, and generating arguments [14, 15] involves the
automatic extraction of arguments and their relationships from text. Starting from the identification of
claims, premises, and evidence in a piece of text, as well as the relationships between them, such as
support, attack, or rebuttal, computational argumentation methods can be used to analyze the strengths
and weaknesses of arguments, their quality, and to identify common patterns and themes. Usually,
supervised learning methods are used to address AM tasks, leading to the need to define beforehand
annotated datasets for the specific tasks and application scenarios, even if recently some empirical
approaches have been proposed to synthesize and generate arguments. Among the recent challenges
of the AM field (Dagstuhl Seminar 22432 “Towards a Unified Model of Scholarly Argumentation”),
there is the task of detecting manipulation in scientific publications through the identification of
duplicate arguments and the computation of argument similarity [16], which strictly relates to the
fallacy detection task. Moreover, a few works have focused on highlighting distortions in scientific
communication [17], as well as in detecting quantified information mismatches between reported and
actual scientific findings [18].
Progress beyond the state-of-the-art: While scientific texts aim to present verifiable evidence for a
series of stated claims, the interpretation of such objective sources of evidence is often ambiguous and
subjective. In this project, we will first enhance and tailor Argument mining approaches to address
domain-specific features of scientific argumentation in science education texts. Then, we will explore the
notion of similarity between natural language arguments, which is currently unexplored, but it would
be crucial to check the validity and coherence of argumentative scientific content across languages, both
for human-generated and machine-translated texts. The result of this task is the automatic extraction
of the full argument graph, on which further inferences can be applied. Such argumentation graphs
will also be exploited for critical questions generation, to evaluate critical thinking in scientific contexts
across languages. Applications of argument mining in scientific discourse have been so far limited, in
particular, because current methods are insensitive to the factual content of scientific arguments, an
issue that will be carefully addressed in the context of CRITICS, following our work in the medical
education domain [19].
2.3. Critical Questions Generation and Automatic Assessment
Critical questions are vital for competency-based science assessments because they address deeper
understanding beyond fact memorization to apply scientific knowledge and skills in practical contexts,
which is the central aim of competency-based assessment. Unlike simple recall questions, critical
questions help to evaluate essential higher-order thinking skills, measure students’ ability to transfer
knowledge to new topic-specific contexts and provide diagnostic insights into reasoning patterns and
misconceptions [20, 21]. There have been approaches to automated question and feedback generation
[22, 23], but automatic Critical Questions Generation is a largely unexplored task [24], although some
works have argued about their utility in identifying fallacious reasoning, and also for assessing the
quality of argumentative essays [25].
Progress beyond the state-of-the-art: Text-based automated assessment systems have been developed
to automatically grade, classify or to provide feedback or guidance [22]. However, CRITICS will provide
for the first time textual feedback for students by automatically generating Critical Questions, argument
feedback and grades based on the TLSs developed for topic specific competency-based assessments in
natural sciences and AI. More specifically, the generation of Critical Questions will be aligned with
specific learning goals and assessment criteria specified in the TLSs, ensuring that the feedback is
relevant and focused on the intended learning outcomes. Note that the generation will be multilingual,
namely, in Basque, French, German and Lithuanian. These questions often apply models such as
the Bloom’s taxonomy, CER (Claim, Evidence, Reasoning) or CQMAA (Critical Questions Model of


Argument Assessment) to structure students’ responses and evaluations [26, 21].
2.4. Evaluation and Benchmarking
MT evaluation typically relies on automated metrics like BLEU, ChrF++, TER, or COMET. Though
WMT includes some biomedical translation resources, comprehensive scientific text datasets remain
notably absent [3]. However, automatic evaluation of text generation tasks remains an open challenge.
In CRITICS, these tasks will be focused (apart from MT, covered above) in the evaluation of Critical
Questions and TLS, and Automatic Feedback Generation. Although the task of automatic Critical
Questions Generation is rather new [24], automatic metrics for question generation in general have
been investigated. Novel approaches like QGEval offer multi-dimensional assessment [23]. Still, there is
a strong research interest in devising more comprehensive LLM-based evaluation methods [27, 28], also
for question generation in particular [23]. Despite these new automatic methods, human evaluation
is still considered to be essential. Thus, expert assessments would focus on grammatical correctness,
relevance, semantic soundness, quality of the evidence-based argumentation, and (in some cases)
alignment with cognitive frameworks like Bloom’s Taxonomy [15].
The consortium has ample research experience regarding evaluation and benchmarking relevant to
the CRITICS project. EHU has developed a state-of-the-art open-source LLM for Basque, Latxa [13].
EHU, in collaboration with CNRS, has released the first multilingual LLM for the medical domain,
evaluating it on medical and scientific benchmarks. EHU has collected the largest corpora available for
Basque, which contains circa 1.4 billion tokens [13], and has experience in the development of new
benchmarks for multilingual evaluation of LLMs [29, 13, 30]. Regarding Argument Mining, CNRS and
EHU have released the first multilingual dataset for the medical domain annotated with argument
structures [31] and the first publicly available dataset of Critical Questions [24] linked to Argument
Schemes. EHU has already published various results with similarity and LLM-based evaluation methods
in pairwise ranking- and reference-based settings [24, 32, 33]. ZHAW has developed theoretical
foundations for the applications of automated evaluation for generative models (with a focus on
Machine Translation) [34, 35]. This provides a strong foundation for correctly applying automated
evaluation and calibrating the metrics to avoid biased evaluation results [36]. They also published work
on the robustness and reliability of trained metrics [35].
Progress beyond the state-of-the-art: The use of LLM-based evaluation for text generation tasks
related to MT and Critical Questions and Feedback generation in the scientific domain remains an open
research problem. CRITICS will provide new LLM-based evaluation methods specifically tailored to the
relevant features of translating MT of scientific documents and to the science teaching-related criteria
of the automatically generated Critical Questions and Assessment/Feedback.
3. Methodology and Work Plan
Although CRITICS’ vision applies across disciplines, the project focuses on two areas: (i) natural sciences
(biology, chemistry, and physics) and (ii) Artificial Intelligence. The former is key to competency-based
assessments, while the latter poses specific translation challenges due to the continuous introduction of
new terminology that may lack established equivalents in less-resourced languages [3, 37]. CRITICS will
target a diverse spectrum of languages, namely, Basque (agglutinative language isolate), Lithuanian (East
Baltic, inflectional), German (West Germanic, inflectional), and French (Romance, synthetic-fusional).
Every objective will be addressed in a multilingual setting, namely, including the four target languages
of the project.
1. Objective 1. LLM-based Machine Translation of Scientific Documents: Focused on developing and
adapting open-weight LLMs for high-quality, document-level MT of scientific texts, particularly
in low- and medium-resource language pairs (e.g., English–Lithuanian/Basque/French/German).


2. Objective 2. Argumentation serves as a fundamental mechanism in scientific discourse, facilitat-
ing the process of reaching conclusions and facilitating science literacy and critical thinking. This
objective will focus on training LLMs to recognize evidence-based argumentation and identify
fallacies and scientific misconceptions.
3. Objective 3. Automatic Assessment and Critical Thinking: Rather than merely identifying gaps in
the scientific discourse, automatic assessment will also involve the generation of Critical Questions
and Detailed Feedback in competency-based assessment settings (PISA style - Programme for
International Student Assessment) where cross-linguistic comparability is essential.
4. Objective 4. Evaluation: qualitatively evaluate the generation of critical questions and automatic
assessment feedback using LLMs-as-a-Judge paradigm in a way that can be compared with
human-generated judgments [24].
3.1. Work Plan
The project work plan consists of three Development-Evaluation cycles that will be replicated for each
of the technical work packages (WP2-WP5). The overall structure of the work plan structured in work
packages is as follows. In a first step, in WP2 the consortium will define the final requirements for
the use cases (Parallel Translator of Scientific Documents and Teacher Evaluator) of the project. Also
in WP2 the data collection required to address the objectives and research questions related to each
use case will be performed. Regarding the MT use case, most of the relevant data sources for natural
sciences (biology, chemistry, and physics) and Artificial Intelligence are already identified following
open science criteria.
MT of scientific data. The choice of English data sources aims to ensure a massive amount of scientific
content to develop the LLM-based MT of scientific articles in WP3 and WP5 while being able to distribute
the pre-processed corpus and the scientific outcomes. Data sources will include Biorxiv4 (biology and
biochemistry), PubMed Central5 (biomedical and life sciences, some data also available in French),
chemrxiv,6 arxiv for Physics and Artificial Intelligence,7 ACL Anthology Corpus (AI and NLP),8 and
other sources relevant for the scientific disciplines targeted in CRITICS, for example, evidence-based
scientific educational resources such as Scientix,9 STEM learning centre,10 e-bug.11 Note that pre-
print papers usually include information about their peer-reviewed version, which will prioritize to
automatically translate into the targeted languages. Furthermore, most of these resources provide API
access to their content in some structured format to avoid any OCR of PDF articles. A final selection
and analysis of the most appropriate data sources will be done in WP2.
Competency-based Assessments data. We will also compile and annotate (WP2) 500 competency-
based assessments in higher education (questionnaires with student responses and corresponding
teacher’s assessments) are available in-house at UPV/EHU and will be the basis for developing and
evaluating the Teacher Evaluator tool and research in WP4. This data will be fully anonymized and
released following privacy and open science policies. Once both types of data are compiled and pre-
processed, WP2 will annotate argumentation graphs, critical questions, and feedback/assessment for
benchmarking in WP5. Using the data for evaluation and development, WP3 will primarily focus on the
advancement of SOTA by training and experimenting with LLMs for MT of scientific data. In WP4 novel
research will address the quality assessment of argumentation in scientific and educational texts. WP5
will investigate new techniques to evaluate challenging text generation tasks such as MT of scientific
documents, Critical Questions and Automatic Feedback Generation. Finally, WP6 will apply every
4https://api.biorxiv.org/
5https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
6https://chemrxiv.org/
7https://arxiv.org/
8https://github.com/shauryr/ACL-anthology-corpus
9https://www.scientix.eu/
10https://www.stem.org.uk/
11https://www.e-bug.eu/


result obtained in WP2, WP3 and WP4 to develop the two tools and prototypes for a Parallel Translator
of Scientific Documents and a Teacher Evaluator.
1. WP2. Data Collection: In this WP we will address the data collection, processing, and manual
annotation and evaluation for benchmarking of the various modules in WP5. The correct descrip-
tion of the data guarantees its traceability, contributing to the explainability and transparency of
the models. We also plan to obtain new high-quality instruction and alignment datasets derived
from already instructed models [37] using the magpie approach [38] to reduce the need for
expensive human-annotated instruction data.
2. WP3. LLM-based MT: Adapt and optimize MT techniques for scholarly documents, with a
focus on low-resource language pairs (English-Lithuanian, English-Basque) and medium-resource
pairs (English-French, English-German). Improve translation quality using open-weight LLMs
[39, 11, 12], domain-specific data [37], and strategies like prompt engineering, terminology
integration [4], and lightweight fine-tuning.
3. WP4. Argumentation:. Tailor Argument mining approaches to address domain-specific features
of scientific argumentation in multilingual educational texts. Assess the coherence of argumen-
tative scientific content across languages. Critical questions generation [24], to enhance and
evaluate students’ ability to analyze complex texts, evaluate claims and evidence, and construct
well-reasoned arguments.
4. WP5. Evaluation and Benchmarking: First, this WP evaluates the translated scientific texts.
We investigate two approaches. First, the human evaluation, and second automated evaluation
procedures. For human evaluation, the main challenge is reproducibility, as human ratings suffer
from high variance; thus, we will develop protocols and guidelines to reduce this issue. The main
challenges for automated evaluation are that they disagree with human feedback and tend to
prefer certain systems disproportionately. Thus, the second focus of this WP is developing and
calibrating automated metrics to evaluate MT and assessment generation [24, 32, 33].
4. Concluding Remarks
CRITICS aims to contribute to the democratization of scientific knowledge by integrating LLM-based
MT with critical thinking in science education, overcoming language barriers for low- and medium-
resource languages like Basque, Lithuanian, French, and German. Through its six work packages, the
project will strive to deliver optimized MT for scientific documents, argumentation mining tailored to
scientific texts, automated critical feedback generation, and robust evaluation methods, all validated via
applications such as the Parallel Reader and Teacher Evaluator.
By addressing key challenges in terminology consistency, document structure preservation, and
multilingual argumentation assessment, CRITICS advances beyond the current state-of-the-art in
domain-specific NLP and educational tech. The project’s emphasis on open-weight models, synthetic
data generation, and LLM-as-a-judge metrics will investigate how to ensure reproducible, transparent
results that foster scientific literacy across diverse linguistic contexts.
Future extensions could scale to additional low-resource languages and integrate emerging multimodal
LLMs for visual scientific content, amplifying the project’s impact on global science education.
Acknowledgments
EHU’s researchers acknowledge the following MCIN/AEI/10.13039/501100011033 projects: (i) CRITICS
(PCI2025-167239-2) funded by MICIU/AEI /10.13039/501100011033 and co-funded by the European
Union; (ii) DeepThought (PID2024-159202OB-C21) funded by ERDF, EU, and (iii) Xixare (PID2024-
159566NB-I00). CNRS/UniCA research is supported by the French National Research Agency (grant
ANR-25-CHR4-0002-02).


References
[1] M. Méheut, D. Psillos, Teaching–learning sequences: aims and tools for science education research,
International Journal of Science Education 26 (2004) 515–535.
[2] A. Ruiz-González, A. Rico, J. Guisasola,
Learning About Sound in Initial Teacher Training:
Evaluation and Redesign of a Teaching-Learning Sequence, in: Connecting Science Education with
Cultural Heritage: Selected Papers from the ESERA 2023 Conference, Springer, 2025, pp. 157–171.
[3] H. C. Kleidermacher, J. Zou, Science across languages: assessing LLM multilingual translation of
scientific papers, in: Findings of the EACL 2026, 2026, pp. 3932–3947.
[4] S. Kim, M. Sung, J. Lee, H. Lim, J. G. Perez, Efficient terminology integration for LLM-based trans-
lation in specialized domains, in: Proceedings of the Ninth Conference on Machine Translation,
2024, pp. 636–642.
[5] L. Wang, C. Lyu, T. Ji, Z. Zhang, D. Yu, S. Shi, Z. Tu, Document-level machine translation with
large language models, in: Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing, 2023, pp. 16646–16661.
[6] W. Zhu, H. Liu, Q. Dong, J. Xu, S. Huang, L. Kong, J. Chen, L. Li, Multilingual machine translation
with large language models: Empirical results and analysis, in: Findings of NAACL 2024, 2024, pp.
2765–2781.
[7] B. Zhang, B. Haddow, A. Birch, Prompting large language model for machine translation: A case
study, in: International conference on machine learning, PMLR, 2023, pp. 41092–41110.
[8] M. Sabo, J. Klein, G. Bernardinello, Boosting machine translation with AI-powered terminology
features, in: EAMT, 2024, pp. 25–26.
[9] H. Lu, H. Yang, H. Huang, D. Zhang, W. Lam, F. Wei, Chain-of-dictionary prompting elicits
translation in large language models, in: EMNLP, 2024, pp. 958–976.
[10] J. Kapoči¯uṫe-Dzikieṅe, T. Bergmanis, M. Pinnis, Localizing AI: Evaluating Open-Weight Language
Models for Languages of Baltic States, in: NoDaLiDa/Baltic-HLT, 2025, pp. 287–295.
[11] G. Team, T. Mesnard, C. Hardin, R. Dadashi, S. Bhupatiraju, S. Pathak, L. Sifre, M. Rivière, M. S.
Kale, J. Love, et al., Gemma: Open models based on gemini research and technology, arXiv preprint
arXiv:2403.08295 (2024).
[12] A. Grattafiori, A. Dubey, A. Jauhri, A. Pandey, A. Kadian, A. Al-Dahle, A. Letman, A. Mathur,
A. Schelten, A. Vaughan, et al., The llama 3 herd of models, arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.21783 (2024).
[13] J. Etxaniz, O. Sainz, N. Miguel, I. Aldabe, G. Rigau, E. Agirre, A. Ormazabal, M. Artetxe, A. Soroa,
Latxa: An open language model and evaluation suite for basque, in: Proceedings of the 62nd
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), 2024,
pp. 14952–14972.
[14] M. Stede, J. Schneider, G. Hirst, Argumentation mining, Springer, 2019.
[15] J. Lawrence, C. Reed, Argument mining: A survey, Computational linguistics 45 (2019) 765–818.
[16] M. Glockner, Y. Hou, P. Nakov, I. Gurevych, Missci: Reconstructing fallacies in misrepresented
science, in: Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), 2024, pp. 4372–4405.
[17] I. Augenstein, Determining the credibility of science communication, in: Proceedings of the
Second Workshop on Scholarly Document Processing, 2021, pp. 1–6.
[18] D. Wright, J. Pei, D. Jurgens, I. Augenstein, Modeling information change in science communication
with semantically matched paraphrases, in: Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing, 2022, pp. 1783–1807.
[19] B. Molinet, S. Marro, E. Cabrio, S. Villata, Explanatory argumentation in natural language for
correct and incorrect medical diagnoses, Journal of Biomedical Semantics 15 (2024) 8.
[20] P. P. Lemons, J. D. Lemons, Questions for assessing higher-order cognitive skills: It’s not just
bloom’s, CBE—Life Sciences Education 12 (2013) 47–58.
[21] E. M. Nussbaum, Critical integrative argumentation: Toward complexity in students’ thinking,
Educational Psychologist 56 (2021) 1–17.
[22] R. Gao, H. E. Merzdorf, S. Anwar, M. C. Hipwell, A. R. Srinivasa, Automatic assessment of text-


based responses in post-secondary education: A systematic review, Computers and Education:
Artificial Intelligence 6 (2024) 100206.
[23] W. Fu, B. Wei, J. Hu, Z. Cai, J. Liu, Qgeval: benchmarking multi-dimensional evaluation for
question generation, in: Proceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing, 2024, pp. 11783–11803.
[24] B. Calvo Figueras, R. Agerri, Benchmarking Critical Questions Generation: A Challenging Reason-
ing Task for Large Language Models, in: Findings of the EMNLP 2025, 2025, pp. 5635–5652.
[25] Y. Song, M. Heilman, B. B. Klebanov, P. Deane, Applying argumentation schemes for essay scoring,
in: Proceedings of the first workshop on argumentation mining, 2014, pp. 69–78.
[26] M. Nussbaum, L. Tian, M. Van Winkle, H. Perera, L. Putney, I. Dove, K. Carroll, Using the critical
questions model of argumentation for science teacher professional learning and student outcomes,
International Society of the Learning Sciences (ISLS) (2020).
[27] J. Gu, X. Jiang, Z. Shi, H. Tan, X. Zhai, C. Xu, W. Li, Y. Shen, S. Ma, H. Liu, et al., A survey on
llm-as-a-judge, The Innovation (2024).
[28] D. Li, B. Jiang, L. Huang, A. Beigi, C. Zhao, Z. Tan, A. Bhattacharjee, Y. Jiang, C. Chen, T. Wu, et al.,
From generation to judgment: Opportunities and challenges of llm-as-a-judge, in: Proceedings of
the 2025 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, 2025, pp. 2757–2791.
[29] I. Alonso, M. Oronoz, R. Agerri, Medexpqa: Multilingual benchmarking of large language models
for medical question answering, Artificial intelligence in medicine 155 (2024) 102938.
[30] I. García-Ferrero, R. Agerri, A. A. Salazar, E. Cabrio, I. De la Iglesia, A. Lavelli, B. Magnini, B. Molinet,
J. Ramirez-Romero, G. Rigau, et al., Medmt5: An open-source multilingual text-to-text llm for the
medical domain, in: Proceedings of the 2024 Joint International Conference on Computational
Linguistics, Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC-COLING 2024), 2024, pp. 11165–11177.
[31] E. Sviridova, A. Yeginbergen, A. Estarrona, E. Cabrio, S. Villata, R. Agerri, Casimedicos-arg: A
medical question answering dataset annotated with explanatory argumentative structures, in:
Proceedings of the 2024 conference on empirical methods in natural language processing, 2024,
pp. 18463–18475.
[32] A. Yeginbergen, M. Oronoz, R. Agerri, Dynamic knowledge integration for evidence-driven
counter-argument generation with large language models, in: Findings of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: ACL 2025, 2025, pp. 22568–22584.
[33] I. Zubiaga, A. Soroa, R. Agerri, A llm-based ranking method for the evaluation of automatic
counter-narrative generation, in: Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
EMNLP 2024, 2024, pp. 9572–9585.
[34] P. Von Däniken, J. M. Deriu, D. Tuggener, M. Cieliebak, Favi-score: A measure for favoritism in
automated preference ratings for generative ai evaluation, in: Proceedings of the 62nd Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), 2024, pp.
4437–4454.
[35] J. M. Deriu, P. Von Däniken, D. Tuggener, M. Cieliebak, Correction of errors in preference ratings
from automated metrics for text generation, in: Findings of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: ACL 2023, 2023, pp. 6456–6474.
[36] P. von Däniken, J. M. Deriu, A. Rodrigo, M. Cieliebak, Improving quantification with minimal
in-domain annotations: Beyond classify and count, in: Proceedings of the International AAAI
Conference on Web and Social Media, volume 18, 2024, pp. 1585–1598.
[37] D. Zhang, Z. Hu, S. Zhoubian, Z. Du, K. Yang, Z. Wang, Y. Yue, Y. Dong, J. Tang, Sciinstruct: a
self-reflective instruction annotated dataset for training scientific language models, Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems 37 (2024) 1443–1473.
[38] Z. Xu, F. Jiang, L. Niu, Y. Deng, R. Poovendran, Y. Choi, B. Y. Lin, Magpie: Alignment data synthesis
from scratch by prompting aligned llms with nothing, arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.08464 (2024).
[39] J. Bai, S. Bai, Y. Chu, Z. Cui, K. Dang, X. Deng, Y. Fan, W. Ge, Y. Han, F. Huang, et al., Qwen
technical report, arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.16609 (2023).
